IN THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN HOLDEN AT UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN
SUIT NO; SUC/JC/OJ/002/24-25 CITATION; (2025) 2 USLR
BEFORE THE LORDSHIPS;
HONOURABLE JUSTICE TOHEEB ABDULSAMOD OBASANJO(DELIVERED THE LEAD JUDGMENT)
HONOURABLE JUSTICE AIWINILOMO FATIMAH ADUKE HONOURABLE JUSTICE ASHIMI SAOBAN ADEDAYO
BETWEEN
1. ADEDEJI FAVOUR ADEYINKA
2. FATOYE OBAFEMI DAVID
3. MUJAHID
NURUDEEN..........................................................CLAIMANTS
AND
1. THE EXECCUTIVE COUNCIL OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION BAR
2. THE VICE PRESIDENT THE STUDENTS’ UNION BAR
3. THE DIRECTOR OF FINANCE THE STUDENTS’
BAR ................DEFENDANTS
RATIO DECIDENDI
TEKBIRU
UNION
1. Non joinder of parties; failure to include the necessary parties did not challenge the jurisdiction of the court to hear and determine a case. Although the director of finance was not included as defendant to the instant case did not lead to the strucking out of the case, the court only give a directive that the proper party should be added to determine the case.
2. Constitution Supremacy; The Constitution Students’ Union Bar emphasis on the supremacy of the constitution. It provides that supremacy of the Students’ Union Bar cannot be overemphasized and that its provision cannot be subjected to the wimps and caprices of any member or officer of the association.
3. Reserved function/rule of ECSUBAR; Under Section 6(1) and the Second Schedule of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution:An Electoral Committee (ECSUBAR) must be established by the Executive Council during the rain/second semester.ECSUBAR alone has the exclusive responsibility for conducting all elections into executive offices of the Students’ Union Bar, including both general elections and bye-elections.
18
4. The executive council did not have the power to conduct bye-election. Where a statute has made provision for steps to be taken in doing things, no other step than those prescribed should be followed.
5. Literal interpretation; the court adopted literal rule holding that the provision is clear without any sort of ambiguity.
6. Legal effect of the word 'shall'; when the word shall is used in a statutory provision imports that a thing must be done. It is a form of command or mandate.
NOTABLE HOLDINGS
1. ON JURISDICTION AND NON-JOINDER:
The court struck out the defendants’ preliminary objection for non-joinder.Held that non-joinder does not defeat the action entirely; rather, the proper party (Director of Finance) must be joined. Per Hon. Justice Toheeb Abdulsamod Obasanjo
2. ECSUBAR’S RESERVED ROLE AND INTERPRETATION OF SECTIONS 6(1), 8, AND THE SECOND SCHEDULE OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION BAR CONSTITUTION.
it is crystal clear like the Zam zam water in the holy city of Mecca that the community reading of section 8 of the constitution and part 26 of the second schedule of the same Students’ Union Bar Constitution is to the effect that the only body saddled with the responsibility of conducting any election in the association is the Electoral Committee established in part 1 of the second schedule which is known as the Electoral Committee of the Students’ Union Bar Association (ESCUBAR)" Per Hon. Justice Toheeb Abdulsamod Obasanjo
3. ON BYE-ELECTION
The executive council cannot conduct a bye-election. The purported bye-election by the executive was unconstitutional, null and void. Per Hon. Justice Toheeb Abdulsamod Obasanjo
4. ON THE RESPONSIBILITY OF ECSUBAR
At this juncture, it is trite to emphasise the fact that this Honourable Court has embarked on a voyage of discovery, searched far and wide, returned home, now settled with a conclusion that not even a single Officer constituting the Executive Council is neither saddled with electoral responsibilities nor can this important duty be delegated to" PER HON. JUSTICE ASHIMI SAOBAN ADEDAYO, JSU
5. ON SUPREMACY OF THE CONSITITUTION THAT CANNONT BE OVERRIDE BY POWER OF THE GENERAL MEETING
“The powers to make decisions at general meetings can not be used to make a decision that is contrary to the same constitution due to the doctrine of the supremacy of the said PER HON. JUSTICE AIWINILOMO FATIMAH, JSU
LEAD JUDGEMENT DELIVERED BY HON. JUSTICE TOHEEB ABDULSAMOD
OBASANJO
  19

This case is brought before this honourable court on 23rd day of January 2025 via an ORIGINATING SUMMONS BROUGHT PURSUANT TO ORDER 2 RULE B OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT RULES 2021(AS REVIEWED) AND UNDER THE INHERENT JURISDICTION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT in support of which the claimant prayed inter-alia for;
• A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the 1st defendant has failed to perform the duty laid down in the Student Union Bar Constitution.
• A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the executive cannot conduct a Bye election.
• A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the election conducted by the executive of the Student Union Bar was illegal.
• AN ORDER OF THIS COURT RESTRAINIG THE 2ND DEFENDANTS FROM being the Vice President of the Student Union Bar.
• AN ORDER OF THIS COURT MANDATING THE DEFENDANTS TO PAY a token of 50,000 naira to the claimant as cost of litigation.
• AND SUCH OTHER DECLARATIONS AND ORDERS AS THIS HONOURABLE COURT MAY DEEM FIT AND PROPER IN THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THIS CASE OR MATTER.
The claimant for the just determination of the case couched two isues
1. WHETHER OR NOT AN ELECTION CAN TAKE PLACE WITHOUT THE CONSTITUTION OF ECSUBA.
2. WHETHER OR NOT THE EXECUTIVE OF THE STUDENT UNION BAR CAN CONDUCT A BYE-ELECTION
The Honourable case adjourned for hearing of Preliminary Objection filed by the defendant. Where they couched the following issues
1. WHETHER OR NOT THE NON-JOINDER OF THE PROPER PARTIES GOES TO THE ROOT OF THIS CASE 2. WHETHER THERE IS A REASONABLE CAUSE OF ACTION AGAINST THE DEFENDANTS.
3. WHETHER OR NOT THIS HONORABLE COURT HAS JURISDICTION TO ENTERTAIN THIS CASE.
ISSUE ONE:
Whether or not the non-joinder of the proper parties goes to the root of this case.My lords, it is our humble contention that the non-joinder of the proper parties goes to the root of this case.My lords, it is a trite law that the court is only competent to adjudicate on the suit when proper parties are present; otherwise, the court is incompetent. In other words, when proper parties are not brought before the court, there is a lack of jurisdiction and locus standi, as the action is incompetent. Justice F.O.Ayoola(nee Akanbi) V.Alhaji B.A.Bariwa &Ors (1999)11 NWLR (Pt 1225)320.
My lords, the fundamental reason which makes it necessary to make a person a party to an action is to make him bound by the result of the action. Therefore, in determining who is a proper party
20

is, what a court must consider is whether the question in the action cannot be effectually and completely settled unless the person is made a party. Awoniyi V The Registered Trustees of Rosicrucian Order (AMORC)(2000) 10 NWLR (Pt. 676) 522.
My lords, in accordance with the Originating summons brought by the claimants, they claim that there was a Bar election held by the Executive council of the Student union bar, though the Executive council held Bye Election. Assuming without conceding there was a bar election, all parties to this alleged bar election are not joined to this instance. A very important question to ask is, who are those to execute judgement upon?
My Lord, it is evident in law that, it is only where proper parties, (amongst other pre-conditions to the exercise of jurisdiction), are before a court, that a court is competent to adjudicate on matters presented to it. A court has no jurisdiction to make an order which affects the interest of a person who has not been joined as a party to the suit. See OKONTA V PHILLIPS (2010) 12 SCNJ
My lords, flowing from the arguments, we humbly submit that the non-joinder of the office of the Director of Finance as a proper party in this case, goes to the root of the case. Hence, the court has no jurisdiction.
ISSUE TWO
2.0. WHETHER THERE IS A REASONABLE CAUSE OF ACTION AGAINST THE 1ST AND 2ND RESPONDENTS.
My Lords, It is settled law that a cause of action is a set of predefined factual elements that allow for a legal remedy, and there must be a cause of action before instituting an action in a court of law of which the crux of a cause of action must be deducible from valid and verifiable facts. See Nigeria Airways Ltd v. F. A. Ladipo [1990] 209 SC.
My Lords, In the instant case, the plaintiffs’ Originating Summons has not successfully demonstrated the existence of a cause of action. The bulk of facts presented by the plaintiffs are mere speculations and presumptions particularly paragraph 4: “That I know as a matter of fact that the Executive of the Bar conducted the bar election.” which the Defendants/applicants have clarified in his Affidavit in support of the preliminary objection, particularly paragraph 6 where the deponent affirms that: “That I know as a matter of fact that Executive Council conducted bye- election not bar election”. See Okonkwo v. NUC [2013] 15 NWLR [Pt. 1378] 482 at 500.
Furthermore Your Lordships, the 1st Respondent has not engaged in any wrongful or illegal actions that would constitute a cause of action as the law is crystal clear at Part B Second Schedule of the Student Union Bar constitution that “There shall be a bye election in the event of any vacancy to any office as at the time the general elections was conducted not later than one month into the commencement of the new academic session.” And the bar election was conducted on the 13th November, 2024 and the school resumed on _____ . Hence, the requirement of law has been met. In the case of Ohakim v. Agbaso [2010] 19 NWLR [Pt. 1226] 172, the Supreme Court held that “a cause of action is the aggregate of facts that gives a person the right to judicial relief.”
See Adesina v. Ojo [2012] 10 NWLR [Pt. 1309] 552 at 569, See also Muhammed v. Dantata [1996] 8 NWLR [Pt. 469] 745. It is submitted that a cause of action is linked to the issue of jurisdiction of a court. If the plaintiff does not have a cause of action, the court cannot properly assume 21

jurisdiction to entertain the matter. It is a sine qua non to the exercise of jurisdiction; the cause of action of a plaintiff in essence is a condition precedent to the court's jurisdiction. Thus, before the court can proceed to the hearing of a matter on the merit, the plaintiff must establish show that there is a reasonable cause of action. Therefore, for a plaintiff to be able to obtain reliefs in a cause, he must have the necessary standing, that is why issues of cause of action or standing to institute an action must be raised in limine before going in to the merit of the matter in dispute between the parties Arowolo v Akaiyejo [2012] 4 NWLR (pt 1290)286 (p. 307, para B- E)We humble submit that the claimants/respondents have failed to establish reasonable cause of action.We hereby pray this honourable court holds so.
ISSUE THREE
3.0 WHETHER OR NOT THIS HONOURABLE COURT HAS JURISDICTION TO ENTERTAINED THIS MATTER
3.1 My lords, we humbly contend that this Honourable has jurisdiction to entertain this matter. My lord, the term jurisdiction, has been given judicial notice in the notorious case of Madukolu v Nkemdilim (1962) 2 ALL NLR 581.to means “the power of a court to hear and decide a case.”
3.2 It is a fundamental threshold in a proceeding, and as such, it can be brought at any time or stage even for the first time in supreme Court. The court in the case of Chris v ononuju (2008) 9 NWLR (Pt 1093) 642 at 651, Per Tsamiya J.C.A, held that, a court will be competent to assume jurisdiction on a matter where
(a) The court is properly constituted as regards number and qualification of the members of the bench;
(b) The subject matter of the action is within the jurisdiction of the court; and (c) The case before the court is initiated by due process of law, or
(d) That the condition precedent to the exercise of jurisdiction is complied with. See of Madukolu v Nkemdilim (supra).
My Lords, this instance case, it is humbly contended from Issue one that the claimants have failed to join the proper parties to this suit thereby leading to the non-fulfillment of the due process of law and issue two that the claimants/respondents have failed woefully to establish a reasonable cause of action before this honourable court.If the plaintiff does not have a cause of action, the trial court cannot properly assume jurisdiction to entertain the matter. Odimegwa V Ibezim (2019) 9 NWLR ( pt 1677) 224 ( p. 260 para D-E). My Noble lords, applying and relying on the cited authorities, we humbly submit that this court lacks jurisdiction to hear and determine this case.
The defendant couched a sole issue as a reply for the preliminary objection.
1. WHETHER OR NOT THE ACTION CAN BE DEFEATED BY REASON OF NON- JOINDER OF PARTIES
My lords, it is our contention on this issue that the action cannot be defeated by reason of non- joinder of a party. Non-joinder is defined as the omission to join a person as a party to a suit, whether as Plaintiff or defendant who ought to have been joined. See the case of Ifeacho v Inland
22

Med. Co (Nig.) Ltd. (1999) JELR 48843 (CA) The general rule is that no action shall be defeated by reason of non-joinder of a party.
On this, Order 13 Rule 16(3) River State High Court (Civil Procedure) Rules 2010 provides: A judge may order that the names of any party who ought to have been joined or whose presence before the court is necessary to effectually and completely adjudicate upon and settle the questions involved in the proceedings be added.
Also, Order 10 Rule 5(1) of the Lagos Rules provides: Where it appears to a court, at or before hearing, that all the persons possibly interested in the suit have not been made parties, the court may adjourn, and direct that those persons bre made either plaintiff or defendant In the case of recent case of Habindi v Hangiya & Ors (2023) LPELR-60585 (CA), My lords citing the provision of Order 13 Rule 16 (1) of the High Court of Adamawa State (Civil Procedure) Rules 2013 makes it clear beyond per adventure that
“No proceedings shall be defeated by reason of misjoinder or nonjoinder of parties and the Court may deal with the matter in controversy so far as regards the rights and interests of the parties actually before it” whilst Rule 2 thereof permits applications by existing parties to add third parties as plaintiffs or defendants.
Furthermore, my lords Rule 21 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure permits the addition of a party who should have been included from the onset, ensuring that all relevant parties are given the opportunity to participate in the legal process and the court can fully and fairly adjudicate the matter. It is on this basis that we submit that this case be not struck out but counsel be made to file an application for the joinder of the missing party and we pray this honorable court holds so.
RULING ON THE PRELIMINARY OBJECTION
The Court proceeds on giving its ruling on the Preliminary Objection relying on the cases of F. O. AYOOLA v ALHAJI BARUWA & ORS, HABINDI V HANGIYA & ORS & NGOSI & ANOR v NDUBUSI UCHERARA & ORS, the Court orders the Claimant to join the Financial Secretary as a proper party in this suit and strikes out the Preliminary Objection of the Defendant.
The Defendant brings it to the notice of the Court that the amendment will make the whole process of the Claimant brought back to square one. The Court opines that the Defendant Counsel is presently not in court in the interest of the Director of Finance.The Court orders the Claimant to give a notice to the Director of Finance on or before 4pm 28th January, 2024 and adjourns this matter to same date.
RESOLUTION OF THE COURT ON THIS CASE
My lords, after listening to the very logical and intelligent argument as canvassed by the defendant in his argument made a very succinct and valid position when he said that of Article 4 of the second schedule of the Bar Constitution provides that: “The Electoral Committee shall be responsible for the conduct of elections of members of the Executive Council of the Students’ Union Bar Association.”. However, the community reading of the above provision with Article 6 of the Student Union Bar Constitution that provides that: “There shall be established an Electoral Committee comprising of five Electoral Officers, one of whom shall preside, shall be appointed
  23

by the Executive Council at any of its meeting held in the second/rain semester of their tenure, to conduct elections into the Executive Council” interprets that the election that the Electoral Committee would be responsible for, is that of rain/ second semester. The Law is clear, No doubt! The same constitution by the provision of Article 11 of the second schedule states that: “Elections of the Executive Council shall be held in the rain semester; not later than two weeks to the rain semester examinations.” This further corroborate that the election that would be oversaw by the Electoral Committee is that of the general election and not that of Bye Election.
It is in view of the above that this honourable court couched a sole issue for determination.
WHETHER OR NOT THE BYE-ELECTION CONDUCTED BY THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL IS LEGAL AND SHOULD BE DECLARED SAME.
1.2 My Lords, The provision of section 1(3) of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution emphasis on the supremacy of the constitution when it stated thus, this constitution is supreme and its provisions shall have binding force on all members and officers of the Association. The effect of this provision as stated above is that the supremacy of the Students’ Union Bar cannot be overemphasized and that its provision cannot be subjected to the wimps and caprices of any member or officer of the association. It is the grund norm of which all other laws derive its source. See JAFAR ABUBAKAR v. ALHAJI IBRAHIM HASSAN DANKWAMBO & ORS (2015) AELR 8047 (CA), OBASANJO v. YUSUF (2004) 9 NWLR (Pt. 877) 144 @183, ABACHA v. FAWEHINMI, AG LAGOS v. AG FEDERATION.
1.3 It is of note that the provision of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution as amended by 2018 particularly in the SECTION 8 particularly in para. F of the constitution which provides for the establishment and introduction of Electoral Committee as one of the six committees among the committee to be established by the Students’ Union Bar stated expressly that;
The functions of the committee shall be outlined in the second schedule to this constitution.It is superfluous to make use of a binocular vision to infer from the above provision that the “functions” as stated above and in which the Students’ Union Bar constitution vested on the Electoral Committee as established by that section are listed and extensively discussed in the Second Schedule of the Constitution.
1.5 My Lords, recourse should be taking to the provision of section 26 of the second schedule which states verbatim that;
There shall be a bye election in the event of any vacancy of any office as at the time the general elections was conducted not later than one month into the commencement of the new academic session.
It is of interest that the second schedule of the constitution which listed all the “functions” of the Electoral committee from section 1 to section 28 also has in it the above provision of section 26 as on of its function.
1.6 My lords, whenever the law is faced with a clear provision then such should be interpreted clearly and the court should implore the use of a literal rule of interpretation. The primary rule of interpretation and of construction is the literal rule which requires that we give words used in the statute, and only those words, their ordinary meaning, omitting no words and adding none. See NWAKIRE v. COP (1992) NWLR (Pt. 241) 289, PDP v. INEC (2014) 17 NWLR (PT. 1437 PG.
525 @ 558. The above position was adopted in the golden words of My Learned brother, Hon. 24

Justice Azeez Mujeeb Opeyemi CJSU (as he then was) in the case of YUSUF MISBAUDEEN ADEYEMI V STUDENTS’ REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF NIGERIAN UNIVERSITIES ENGINEERING STUDENTS ASSOCIATION, UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN (2018) 6 USLR
1.7 Flowing from the words of per Nnaemeka-Agu JSC in DANGANA v. USMAN (2013) 6 NWLR (PT. 1349), The literal rule of interpretation is always preferable unless it would lead to absurdity and inconsistency with the provisions of the statute as a whole. The provision of part 26 of the second schedule is one of the functions of the Electoral Committee as discussed in the provision of section 8 para. F of the constitution.
1.8 My lords, it is crystal clear like the Zam zam water in the holy city of Mecca that the community reading of section 8 of the constitution and part 26 of the second schedule of the same Students’ Union Bar Constitution is to the effect that the only body saddled with the responsibility of conducting any election in the association is the Electoral Committee established in part 1 of the second schedule which is known as the Electoral Committee of the Students’ Union Bar Association (ESCUBAR).
The act of applying the mischief rule of interpretation by the defendant in interpreting a provision which is clearer than a refined diamond deep into a sparkling clean water for wash is nothing but an act of “GANUSI” which this honourable court frowns at.
1.9 It is to be noted that the although the law is silent as to the main body to conduct an election as the provision of part 26 of the second schedule which establishes bye-election only provides for it to be conducted not later than one month into the commencement of the new academic section and which the reason for this section is to allow same members of the electoral committee constituted for the general election to conduct the bye-election. However, what the law does not envisage is an instances where a vacancy in a political post will be as a result of some other factors like death, sickness, loss of studentship status, migration among others unforeseeable circumstances in which the affected office holder might have used more than one month before the vacancy occurs. Here, the law can be expanded using the mischief rule of interpretation as suggested by the counsel to the defendant that the provision of section 8(1) of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution which confers on the executive council to create committee listed in the section “and such other committee as may be created by the Executive Council or General Meeting from time to time. ”Here, the intention of the law makers is that an adhoc committee and not an entirely new electoral committee can be constituted to help conduct a bye election in a situation where the initial committee for the general election as been disolved and the constitution can be done by the Executive Council.
In view of the above, this honourable court holds as follows;
1. That the executive council of the Students’ Union Bar Association cannot by law conduct a Bye-Election.
2. That only the electoral committee of the Students’ Union Bar can conduct a valid and lawful general election.
3. That the bye-election which brought in the second and third defendant is unconstitutional and hereby declared null and void.
4. That an adhoc electoral committee should be constituted to have the bar election conducted within the first month into the second semester.
25

5. That the defendants should pay the claimant the total sum of #2,500 as cost of litigation.
CONCURRING JUDGMENT DELIVERED BY HONOURABLE JUSTICE ASHIMI
SAOBAN ADEDAYO
Having had the privilege of reading the draft of the lead judgment just delivered by my learned brother, Toheeb Abdulsamod Obasanjo, JSU; I completely and agreeably concur with the reasoning and inescapable conclusion reached therein by the Learned Justice on the sole issue and I adopt same as mine, with just a little words of mine to add to the rich analysis contained therein.To elucidate my additional contribution, let me pontificate as follows. The primary duty of the court is to interpret the law and apply same to the fact(s) presented before it. The extant provision of the Students’ Union Bar on the body saddled with electoral responsibilities is clear beyond microscopic scrutiny. The provision of the aforementioned statute on the fact that the ECSUBA should be in existence to conduct elections cannot be overemphasized.
It is never herculean to deduce that the same statute that states that the Elections of the Executive Council shall be held in the rain semester never fails to mention that there shall be a bye election in the event of any vacancy to any office as at the time the general elections was conducted not later than one month into the commencement of the new academic session under Articles 11 and 26 of the Second Schedule of the SU Bar Constitution respectively. The fact that both are stated under the aforementioned Schedule and as well corroborated by Section 8, Paragraph F of the same constitution, which reads that: "The functions of the Committee shall be as outlined in the Second Schedule to this Constitution" clearly shows that under any circumstances, the ECSUBA is solely empowered to conduct any election within the Students Union Bar Association. This Section 8, I will say, the Defendants Counsel purposely overlooked.
As visible as it is in this instant case, if there is still vacancy to any office of the Executive Council, the question which can be reasonably raised is: Can the Executive Council whose duties are duly established with no binoculars necessary to see how visible they are conduct an election for any person into the same Council? At this juncture, it is trite to emphasise the fact that this Honourable Court has embarked on a voyage of discovery, searched far and wide, returned home, now settled with a conclusion that not even a single Officer constituting the Executive Council is neither saddled with electoral responsibilities nor can this important duty be delegated to.My Lords in the case of SAVANNAH BANK OF NIGERIA PLC v CENTRAL BANK OF NIGERIA & ORS (2009) 6 NWLR (Pt. 1137) 237, ruled that a public body vested with statutory powers must take care not to exceed its powers. It must keep within the limits of the authority committed to it. It must act in good faith and it must act reasonably to be able to enjoy the protection provided by law.
See also VIGEO POWER LTD. V. BAMISILE (2023) 18 NWLR (PT. 1916) 255, DOMA V. OGIRI (1998) 3 NWLR (PT. 541) 246, DODODO V. E.F.C.C. (2013) 1 NWLR (PT. 1336) 468 In my opinion, the constitution of an ad-hoc committee is one of the easiest things that could have been done to avoid illegal contravention and disrespect to the SU Bar Constitution. As it is easy to assemble various fruits for Iftar so it is to assemble five individuals to, as opined by My Lord Hon. Justice Toheeb Abdulsamod Obasanjo, constitute an ad-hoc committee in the stead of the ECSUBA for the purpose of conducting a bye election within a twinkle of an eye.It is in the light
  26

of the above and for the fuller reasons so adroitly marshaled out in the lead judgment, that I too hereby adopt My Lord’s decision as mine.
CONCURRING JUDGEMENT DELIVERED BY HON. JUSTICE AIWINNILOMO
FATIMAH ADUKE
I was opportune to read the draft of my learned brother Toheeb Abdulsamod Ob, JSU and I align myself with the reasoning, resolution and judgement made by my learned brother. I will additionally assert that the Student Union Constitution did not only saddle the electoral committee; ECSUBAR created in section 6(1) of the constitution the authority to conduct general or bye election but also gives ample time to create and constitute the ECSUBAR.Let me explain and interpret the related sections of student union constitution chronologically. The section 6(1) of the constitution establishes the Electoral committee and state the time for the election of the executive council as second/rain semester.
Section 8 paragraph 8 of the same constitution stated that the function of the electoral committee shall be outlined in the second schedule. In N.E.P.A. v. Ango (2001) 15 NWLR (Pt. 737) 627 (CA), the court held on whether schedule is an integral part of a legislation that:
The schedule to an enactment forms an integral part of the legislation. In other words, a schedule to an Act of parliament is as much an enactment as any other part of such an Act. It is not a subsidiary legislation to the Act... Being a provision contained in a schedule, it in no manner derogates from its force or efficacy. It is as efficacious as the provisions of section 4 of the Act which brought the schedule into force. [Board of Customs & Excise v. Barau (1982) 10 SC 48; 7up Bottling Co. v. Abiola & Sons (1996) 7 NWLR (Pt.463) 714; Ibidapo v. Lufthansa Airline (1997) 4 NWLR (Pt.498) 124 referred to.]
Therefore, there must be a community reading of Section 6, 8 and second schedule of the Student Union constitution.And it is in this second schedule that the constitution made mention of the bye election. In Saraki v. F.R.N. (2016) 3 NWLR (Pt. 1500) 531, the court made mention of status of schedule to an enactment –
A schedule to an enactment forms part of the enactment. Thus, paragraph 15(1) of the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999 (as amended) forms part of the Constitution. [NNPC v. Famfa Oil Ltd. (2012) 17 NWLR (Pt. 1328) 148 referred to.] (P. 611, paras. B-C)Section 26 of the second schedule provided for bye election is to be done not later than one month of the commencement of new academic session. Given that this section is under the schedule stated to be function of the ECSUSBA, it can be implied that the intention of the law makers is to put the conduct of bye election under the authority of the ECSUBA. I align myself with the holding of the Court in N.N.P.C v. Famfa Oil Ltd (2012) 17 NWLR (Pt. 1328) 147 which stated that
A schedule to an Act or statute is part of the Act and it is as potent as any part of the Act. It is the duty of the court to ensure that it is bound by rules made under the laws of the land. Such rules can never be ignored. If it is ignored the attainment of justice may be left to the whims and fancies of powerful individuals and this would not be in the interest of justice. (P. 196, paras. A- B)It can further be interpreted that the law makers foresee the reconstitution of the electoral
  27

committee and provide for an ample time of not later than one month for the conduct of the bye election in the new academic session.
I will like to add that the Student union constitution has not in any way conflicted itself neither did it takes the power of the congress in section 7(6) to make decisions at general meetings by voice vote or simple majority (to be determined by the presiding officer) on members present and voting. However, the powers to make decision at general meetings cannot be use to make a decision that is contrary to the same constitution due to the doctrine of the supremacy of the said constitution.In N.N.P.C. v. Trinity Mills Ins. Brokers (2003) 9 NWLR (Pt. 825) 384 (CA), the court limit the efficacy of delegated power and state that:
A power or authority which has been delegated cannot be greater than that from which it is derived; that is, a derived power can never be greater than that available at its source. The applicable Latin maxim Derivativa Potestas Non Potest Esse major
Primitivas. (P. 397, paras. B-C). Therefore, the decision at the general meeting to conduct the bye election without the constitution of the ECSUBA is not valid due to it contradiction of the second schedule of the constitution.
APPEARANCES:
FOR THE CLAIMANTS
F. A, ADEDEJI
M. T. NURUDEEN
H. A. AMOLEGBE
FOR THE DEFENDANT
M. A. AJENIFUJA
ADEBAYO FARUQ ADEBAYO
