IN THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN HOLDEN AT UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN ON TUESDAY, MARCH 18TH , 2025. SUIT NO: SUC/UIL/JC/OJ/003/24-25 CITATION NO: (2025) 11 USLR
BEFORE THEIR LORDSHIPS:
ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE CHIEF JUSTICE OF STUDENTS’ UNION COURT (PRESIDING)
OMOTAYO SAMUEL O., JUSTICE OF STUDENTS’ UNION COURT ASHIMI SAOBAN ADEDAYO, JUSTICE OF STUDENTS’ UNION COURT
ADEDEJI FAVOUR ADEYINKA...................................................CLAIMANT AND
PRESIDENT OF THE FACULTY OF ARTS
WELFARE SECRETARY OF THE FACULTY OF ARTS
WELFARE SECRETARY OF STUDENTS’ UNION
PRESIDENT OF STUDENTS’ UNION...........................................DEFENDANTS
RATIO DECIDENDI
The claimant being a law student, has not shown this honourable court how he would be grossly and adversely affected by this action, either positively or negatively concerning his night reading in faculty of Arts lecture rooms. This court is not in doubt that the claimant has some interests in this case but the question is whether the said interest is sufficient and the answer is in negation. Paragraph 14 of the claimant’s affidavit is not enough to clothes him with the requisite locus standi to institute this suit. This is because 10 as held in Dopah v. Regd. Trustees, UMCN (2019) 4 NWLR (Pt. 1663) 520, a plaintiff has “locus standi” in a matter where he has been or will be adversely affected. ”Therefore, since the claimant has no sufficient interest in this suit to give him the locus standi to institute same, this honourable court loses its jurisdiction
NOTABLE HOLDINGS AND PRONOUNCEMENTS
ON MEANING JURISDICTION
Jurisdiction as held in Dariye v FRN (2015)10 NWLR (pt. 1467)325 is the power of the court to decide a case or issue a decree. It is the authority the court has to decide matters before it
87
or to take cognizance of matter presented in a formal way for its decision. Whenever the issue of jurisdiction is raised, the court must consider it immediately as “proceedings, no matter how well conducted, without jurisdiction, is null and void ab initio and will be declared a nullity. It will not have any recognition in the legal parlance. In other words, proceedings well conducted, without jurisdiction is akin to a house without foundation which will and surely collapse” held in Oni v Cadbury Nig. Plc. (2016)9 NWLR (pt.1516) 80-Per HON. JUSTICE ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE, CJSU
ON INGREDIENTS OF JURISDICTION
The ingredients of jurisdiction as held in the locus classics case of Madukolu v. Nkemdilim (1962) 2 SCNLR 341 and L.M.B. Ltd. V. P.T.F. (2006) 5 NWLR (Pt. 974) 463, which guide a court of law to consider whether it has jurisdiction on the case before it or not are whether (a)the courtv is properly constituted with respect to the number and qualification of its membership;(b) the subject matter of the action is within its jurisdiction;(c) the action is initiated by due process of law; and(d)any condition to the exercise of its jurisdiction has been fulfilled. -Per HON. JUSTICE ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE, CJSU
ORIGINATING SUMMONS AND ITS USE
In Owuama v. Obasi (2011) 1 NWLR (Pt. 1228) 431, the Court of Appeal held that Originating summons is merely a method of commencing proceedings and is not meant to be used to enlarge the jurisdiction of the court. The aim of commencing an action by originating summons is to simplify and speed up proceedings and originating summons can only be useful where there is no serious dispute concerning facts. In Uba v. Moghalu, (2022) 15 NWLR (Pt. 1853) 271, the Supreme Court held that Originating summons is a procedure wherein the evidence is mainly by way of documents and there is no serious dispute as to their existence in the pleadings. It is usually heard on affidavit evidence and involves questions of law rather than issues of fact. See also Zakiral v. Muhammad (2017) 17 NWLR (Pt. 1594) 181; Sani v. Kogi State H.A. (2019) 4 NWLR (Pt. 1661) 172; Dapianlong v. Dariye (2007) 8 NWLR (Pt. 1036) 239. It was also held in University of Lagos v. Aigoro (1991) 2 NWLR (Pt. 179) 376 that Originating summons is only applicable in such circumstances as where there is no dispute on questions of fact or the likelihood of such dispute. Where, for instance, the issue is to determine short questions of construction, and not matters of such controversy that the justice of the case would demand the setting of pleadings, originating summons could be applicable. -Per HON. JUSTICE ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE, CJSU
ON EFFECTS OF INVALID PARAGRAPHS ON AN AFFIDAVIT
The remaining depositions in the claimant’s affidavit that passed the test of law which are now valid as it is held in A.-G., Adamawa State v. A.-G., Fed. (2005) 18 NWLR (Pt. 958) 581 that “where, in considering affidavit evidence, some paragraphs are struck out as being in
88

contravention of the provisions of the Evidence Act, and there are remaining paragraphs of the affidavit in support to sustain the claim, the striking out of the offending paragraphs will not affect the validity of the claim-Per HON. JUSTICE ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE, CJSU
ON LOCUS STANDII
On the second issue, he law as held in ADEDAYO V. P.D.P (2013) 17 NWLR (Pt. 1382) 1 is that “A party who seeks any relief from any court must; before seeking the relief, have the locus standi, the platform, for doing so. Any relief he seeks in the absence of the platform to press such a relief remains incompetent.” Also in Re Benson, (2003) 1 NWLR (Pt. 802) 570 it was held that to be able to approach the court, one must have a legal interest or have locus standi. In essence, such a party must have sufficient legal interest In order to competently seek redress in the court of law. Also, in C.O.M. Inc. v. Cobham (2006) 15 NWLR (Pt. 1002) 283, the Court of Appeal held that for a person to have locus stand in an action, he must be able to show that his civil rights and obligations have been or are in danger of being infringed.In a more specific terms, the court held in Charles v. Gov., Ondo State (2013) 2 NWLR (Pt. 1338) 294 that the process that would assist the court in determining whether or not a party has locus standi to institute action is the statement of claim. -Per HON. JUSTICE ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE, CJSU
LOCATING LOCUS STANDII IN AN ORIGINATING SUMMONS CASE
In an action commenced by originating summons, the relevant process is the affidavit in support. Before determining whether the claimant’s affidavit shows that he has the requisite locus standi to institute this suit, the contents of the said affidavit need to be looked into to see if it is in tandem with the law. This is because affidavit contains only statement of fact within the knowledge of the deponent as held in Jimoh v. Min., F.C.T. (2019) 5 NWLR (Pt. 1664) 45 -Per HON. JUSTICE ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE, CJSU
LEAD JUDGEMENT OF HON. JUSTICE ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE, CJSU
WHETHER OR NOT the right originating process was used to commence the suit giving this honourable court jurisdiction to hear and determine the matter? Jurisdiction as held in Dariye v FRN (2015)10 NWLR (pt. 1467)325 is the power of the court to decide a case or issue a decree. It is the authority the court has to decide matters before it or to take cognizance of matter presented in a formal way for its decision. Whenever the issue of jurisdiction is raised, the court must consider it immediately as “proceedings, no matter how well conducted, without jurisdiction, is null and void ab initio and will be declared a nullity. It will not have any recognition in the legal parlance. In other words, proceedings well conducted, without jurisdiction is akin to a house without foundation which will and surely collapse” held in Oni v Cadbury Nig. Plc. (2016)9 NWLR (pt.1516) 80.
The ingredients of jurisdiction as held in the locus classics case of Madukolu v. Nkemdilim (1962) 2 SCNLR 341 and L.M.B. Ltd. V. P.T.F. (2006) 5 NWLR (Pt. 974) 463, which guide a court of law to consider whether it has jurisdiction on the case before it or not are whether
89

(a)the court is properly constituted with respect to the number and qualification of its membership;(b) the subject matter of the action is within its jurisdiction;(c) the action is initiated by due process of law; and(d)any condition to the exercise of its jurisdiction has been fulfilled.From the arguments of the 3rd and 4th defendants in the first issue couched in their preliminary objections, their argument is in contention of the third ingredient of jurisdiction stating the the wrong originating process was used by the claimant to commence this suit since there is a call for 4 “huge speculation and contestation of facts” and by that writ of summons, not originating summons, ought to have been adopted. In Owuama v. Obasi (2011) 1 NWLR (Pt. 1228) 431, the Court of Appeal held that Originating summons is merely a method of commencing proceedings and is not meant to be used to enlarge the jurisdiction of the court. The aim of commencing an action by originating summons is to simplify and speed up proceedings and originating summons can only be useful where there is no serious dispute concerning facts. In Uba v. Moghalu, (2022) 15 NWLR (Pt. 1853) 271, the Supreme Court held that Originating summons is a procedure wherein the evidence is mainly by way of documents and there is no serious dispute as to their existence in the pleadings. It is usually heard on affidavit evidence and involves questions of law rather than issues of fact. See also Zakiral v. Muhammad (2017) 17 NWLR (Pt. 1594) 181; Sani v. Kogi State H.A. (2019) 4 NWLR (Pt. 1661) 172; Dapianlong v. Dariye (2007) 8 NWLR (Pt. 1036) 239. It was also held in University of Lagos v. Aigoro (1991) 2 NWLR (Pt. 179) 376 that Originating summons is only applicable in such circumstances as where there is no dispute on questions of fact or the likelihood of such dispute. Where, for instance, the issue is to determine short questions of construction, and not matters of such controversy that the justice of the case would demand the setting of pleadings, originating summons could be applicable.Flowing from the above cases, since in a suit commenced by originating summons, the affidavit in support and the counter-affidavit constitute the pleadings as held in Iliyasu v. Rijau (2019) 16 NWLR (Pt. 1697) 1. Taking a careful perusal of the claimant’s affidavit as well as the 1st, 2nd, 3rdand 4th defendants’ counter affidavits even with a microscopic eye, it is clear that there is no dispute as to facts and the likelihood of dispute as to facts is very slim like a thread. Hence, the claimant rightfully commenced this suit with an originating summons amounting to a due process of law clothing this honourable court with the requisite jurisdiction to hear and determine this suit.
RESOLUTION OF THE COURT ON ISSUE TWO
WHETHER OR NOT the claimant’s affidavit is in tandem with the law and clothes him with requisite locus standi to institute this suit?
On the second issue, he law as held in ADEDAYO V. P.D.P (2013) 17 NWLR (Pt. 1382) 1 is that “A party who seeks any relief from any court must; before seeking the relief, have the locus standi,the platform, for doing so. Any relief he seeks in the absence of the platform to press such a relief remains incompetent.” Also in Re Benson, (2003) 1 NWLR (Pt. 802) 570 it was held that to be able to approach the court, one must have a legal interest or have locus standi. In essence, such a party must have sufficient legal interest In order to competently seek redress in the court of law.Also, in C.O.M. Inc. v. Cobham (2006) 15 NWLR (Pt. 1002)
 90

283, the Court of Appeal held that for a person to have locus stand in an action, he must be able to show that his civil rights and obligations have been or are in danger of being infringed.In a more specific terms, the court held in Charles v. Gov., Ondo State (2013) 2 NWLR (Pt. 1338) 294 that the process that would assist the court in determining whether or not a party has locus standi to institute action is the statement of claim. In an action commenced by originating summons, the relevant process is the affidavit in support”.
Before determining whether the claimant’s affidavit shows that he has the requisite locus standi to institute this suit, the contents of the said affidavit need to be looked into to see if it is in tandem with the law. This is because affidavit contains only statement of fact within the knowledge of the deponent as held in Jimoh v. Min., F.C.T. (2019) 5 NWLR (Pt. 1664) 45 Section 115 of the Evidence Act 2011 now amended 2023 provides:
(1) Every affidavit used in the court shall contain only a statement of fact and circumstances to which the witness deposes, either of his own personal knowledge or from information which he believes to be true.”
(2) An affidavit shall not contain extraneous matter, by way of objection, prayer or legal argument or conclusion”.
In Lagos State Govt .v. N.D.I.C. (2021) 2 NWLR (Pt. 1760) 297, “By virtue of section lI5 of the Evidence Act, 2011, every affidavit used in the court shall contain only a statement of facts and circumstances to which the witness deposes, either of his own personal knowledge or from information which he believes to be true. An affidavit shall not contain extraneous matter, by way of objection, prayer or legal argument or conclusion.”
Also in Emeka v. Chuba Ikpeazu (2017) 15 NWLR (Pt. 1589) 345, the court held that “by virtue of section 115(1) and of the Evidence Act, 2011, every affidavit used in the court shall contain only a statement of facts and circumstances to which the witness deposes, either of his own personal knowledge or from information which he believes to be true. An affidavit shall not contain extraneous matter, by way of objection or prayer or legal argument or conclusion. Thus, depositions in any affidavit sworn in support of a cause or matter must not be drafted to include legal arguments, conclusions in law or fact. Where depositions in an affidavit offend this basic law, the offending paragraphs of such an affidavit must be struck out.From this case of Emeka v Chuba Ikpeazu (supra) what the court is expected to do if any deposition or averment in any affidavit contradicts Section 115(2) of Evidence Act, is to strike the offending deposition (s) out only while the main affidavit subsists.
Looking at the claimant’s affidavit from first till seventeenth, the following averments are against the stated provision of the law from the claimant’s affidavit are:
4. That I know as a matter of fact that the President and Welfare Secretary has not been concerned with the welfare of her members (this amounts to conclusion and thus struck out)
5. That I know as a matter of fact that it is the duty of the President and Welfare Secretary to be involved in the welfare of her member (this amounts to legal argument and hence struck out)
91

7. That I know as a matter of fact that all lecture room of the University is for all students ( this also amounts to conclusion and it is struck out)
13. That I know as a matter of fact that as a result of this negligent act of the Welfare Secretary of the Faculty of Art, a phone was stolen (this amounts to legal argument and it is struck out)
15. That I know as a matter of fact that it is the responsibility of the President and Welfare
Secretary of the Faculty of Art to ensure lightening in all Lecture Room of the faculty (this amounts to legal argument and hence struck out)
The remaining depositions in the claimant’s affidavit that passed the test of law which are now valid as it is held in A.-G., Adamawa State v. A.-G., Fed. (2005) 18 NWLR (Pt. 958) 581 that “where, in considering affidavit evidence, some paragraphs are struck out as being in contravention of the provisions of the Evidence Act, and there are remaining paragraphs of the affidavit in support to sustain the claim, the striking out of the offending paragraphs will not affect the validity of the claim. The valid depositions of the claimant’s affidavit are:
1. That I am the claimant in this case.
2. That I am a 300-level Student of Law, Faculty of Law, University of Ilorin.
3. That I am a duly matriculated student of the University of Ilorin.
6. That I know as a matter of fact that I read at night at the Faculty of Arts.
7. 8. That I know as a matter of fact that Lecture Room A1, A2 and A4 has no lightbulb therein.
9. That I know as a matter of fact that ever since I started reading in the Faculty of Arts, there has been no lightbulb in the Lecture Room aforementioned.
10. That I know as a matter of fact that I have been reading in the Faculty of Arts for more than one month.
11. That I know as a matter of fact that the Lecture Room aforementioned is not conducive for reading.
12. That I know as a matter of fact that Lecture Room A3 is the only room with lightbulb and it
is always too crowded at night also making it not conducive for reading.
14. That I know as a matter of fact that I, alongside other students, are also exposed to excessive mosquitoes, while reading.
16. That I know as a matter of fact that at the time of filing this suit, the Lecture Room aforementioned has no lightbulb.
17. That I depose to this affidavit in good faith believing the contents to be true and correct and in accordance with the Oaths Act.
Taking a careful look at the valid depositions of the claimant’s affidavit particularly paragraph 14 which states “that I know as a matter of fact that I, alongside other students, are
92

also exposed to mosquitoes, while reading”, it show that the claimant has some interests in this suit before this honourable court. This is because the word “interest” as held in Daniyan v. Iyagin (2002) 7 NWLR (Pt. 766) 34, “ should not be given a narrow construction. It should be regarded as including any connection, association or interrelation between the applicant and the matter to which the application relates. See also Maradesa v. Military Governor, Oyo State (1986) 3 NWLR (Pt.27)”. The court also heard in the case of Williams v. Dawodu (1988) 4 NWLR (Pt. 87) 189 that “in deciding whether a party has locus standi it is no longer a question of pitching public interest against the interest of an applicant to see if his interest is greater. It is a question of whether an applicant has sufficient interest to protect, and sufficient interest now has very wide concept” .However, this interest in question is not a mere interest but a sufficient interest which as held in the case of Uzoho v. N.C.P. (2007) 10 NWLR (Pt. 1042) and U.B.A. Plc. V. BTL Ind. Ltd. (2004) 18 NWLR (Pt. 904) 180 “would be determined in the light of the peculiar facts and circumstances of each case”. “A test of sufficient interest as held in. Nwonu v. Admin – General, Bendel State (1991) 2 NWLR (Pt.73) 343, is whether the party seeking for the redress or remedy will suffer some injury or hardship arising from the litigation”. In fact in Adesanya v. President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria (1981) 5 S.C. 112 at 152, the court held that “a person must have a sufficient interest in a subject matter of litigation to enable him sue. He must show that either his personal interest will immediately be or has been adversely affected by action or that he has sustained or is in immediate danger.
Flowing from all the aforementioned judicial authorities, the claimant being a law student, has not shown this honourable court how he would be grossly and adversely affected by this action, either positively or negatively concerning his night reading in faculty of Arts lecture rooms. This court is not in doubt that the claimant has some interests in this case but the question is whether the said interest is sufficient and the answer is in negation. Paragraph 14 of the claimant’s affidavit is not enough to clothes him with the requisite locus standi to institute this suit. This is because as held in Dopah v. Regd. Trustees, UMCN (2019) 4 NWLR (Pt. 1663) 520, a plaintiff has “locus standi” in a matter where he has been or will be adversely affected.” Therefore, since the claimant has no sufficient interest in this suit to give him Locus standii
HON. JUSTICE ASHIMI SAOBAN ADEDAYO
Having read in draft the opinion of my learned brother, Honourable Justice Ismail Khadijat Moromoke, CJSU on the ruling of this honourable court on the two preliminary objections filed separately by the defendants, I align myself with his position on the two issues couched by this court and I also make the same order which is the sum of five hundred and twenty- five naira only (#525.00) to be paid to each and every defendant in this suit as the cost of litigation.
 93

HON. JUSTICE OMOTAYO SAMUEL O.
Having read in draft the opinion of my learned brother, Honourable Justice Ismail Khadijatv Moromoke, CJSU, I align myself with his position on the two issues and I also make the same order as to cost.
APPEARANCES:
FOR THE CLAIMANT
F.A ADEDEJI
FOR THE FIRST AND SECOND DEFENDANTS
O.D FATOYE(LEAD COUNSEL)
F.A IYSA-BELLO
F.A ADEDAYO
FOR THE THIRD AND FOURTH DEFENDANTS P.C ESERE, SAU,AGSU(LEAD COUNSEL)
E.F ASHAOLU,SGSU
B.A OYEGBAMI
A.K OLAWOYIN
AMICUS CURAE
ALIMI ABDULSALAM (PRESIDENT OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION BAR O.T OPOOLA,SAU
