IN THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN HOLDEN AT UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN ON MONDAY, APRIL 14TH , 2025. SUIT NO SUC/UIL/JC/OJ/009/24-25 CITATION: (2025) 5 USLR
BEFORE THEIR LORDSHIPS:
HON. JUSTICE AIWINILOMO FATIMAH (PRESIDING JUSTICE)
HON. JUSTICE ASHIMI SAOBAN ADEDAYO, JUSTICE OF STUDENTS’ UNION HON. JUSTICE OMOTAYO SAMUEL JUSTICE OF STUDENTS’ UNION
BETWEEN
ADEDEJI FAVOUR ADEYINKA...................................................................... CLAIMANT AND
THE DIRECTOR OF INFORMATION OF THE
STUDENTS' UNION BAR ASSOCIATION.............................................. 1ST DEFENDANT EXECUTIVE COUNCIL OF THE
STUDENTS’ UNION BAR ASSOCIATION..................................2ND DEFENDANT
PRELIMINARY ISSUES
One O.D Fatoye announced his appearance with the claimant as a claimant counsel. Sequel to the ruling in the case of B.O Oyegbami V SU President (citation) the appearance was questioned on the rationale that a claimant counsel cannot have a mixture of interest; either being a claimant representing himself or having a legal practitioner represent him as his counsel.
P.O Oyebanji and E.F Ashaolu were consulted by the court and they made the submission that the court can overrule the decision of the other division of the Student Union Court if there are tangible reasons such as the peculiarity of this jurisdiction. The court ruled that the decision of the court on claimant being either a litigant or employing the service of its legal practitioner of his choice as counsel still stands and the appearance of O.D Fatoye was struck out.
FACT OF THE CASE
The claimant filed an Originating summons brought pursuant to order 2 rule 2(1) of the Students’ Union court rules 2024(as reviewed) and the inherent jurisdiction of this honourable court on the (date) where two (2) issues was couched:
  44
1. WHETHER OR NOT IT IS THE DUTY OF THE DIRECTOR OF INFORMATION TO POST THE MINUTES OF EVERY CONGRESS HELD ON THE STUDENT UNION BAR WHATSAPP GROUP.
2. WHETHER OR NOT THE DIRECTOR OF INFORMATION HAS FAILED TO PERFORM HER DUTY AS IT HAS BEEN LAID DOWN IN SECTION 5 SUB 5 PART D PARAGRAPH
WHEREOF, the Claimant prays for 8 reliefs, attached as well is an affidavit in support of the Originating Summons deposed to by one Adedeji Favour Adeyinka and a written address in support of the originating summons.
RATIO DECIDENDI:
Interpretation of Constitution – Literal Rule – Duty of Information Officer:
Where the words of a constitution or statute are clear and unambiguous, effect must be given to them as they are, irrespective of whether the result is harsh or inconvenient. Section 5(5) Part D Paragraph ii of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution 2017 (as amended) mandates the Director of Information to disseminate information “through all available effective media.” The Court held, applying the literal rule, that this includes the Students’ Union Bar WhatsApp platform as it is a valid and effective media channel used internally among Bar members. Non-dissemination of Bar Congress minutes through the platform amounted to dereliction of duty.
NOTABLE HOLDINGS AND PRONOUNCEMENTS:
ON INTERPRETATION OF “ALL EFFECTIVE MEDIA”:
Relied on Dangana v. Usman (2013) 6 NWLR (Pt. 1349) 50 and Amasike v. Registrar-General CAC (2006) 3 NWLR (Pt. 968) 463 to hold that where the words used are clear, the literal meaning must be upheld. “All effective media” must be taken to mean every effective channel of communication available, including WhatsApp, especially as the platform is tailored to internal association communication.- PER AIWINILOMO FATIMAH, JSU
ON AFFIDAVIT DRAFTING – USE OF ‘THAT’:
In line with Eze v. Okolonji (1997) 7 NWLR (Pt. 513) 515, the court observed that although the word “that” is often overused in affidavits, it has become a traditional legal drafting style and, while redundant, is not erroneous.- PER ASHIMI SAOBAN ADEDAYO, JSU
Judgment and Orders:
1. The Court held that the Director of Information has a constitutional duty under Section 5(5) Part D Paragraph ii to disseminate the minutes of Bar Congresses through all available effective media, including the WhatsApp group of the Bar.
2. The Court declared that the Director failed in her constitutional duty by not posting the minutes on the WhatsApp platform.
45

3. It ordered strict compliance henceforth with the constitutional provision by disseminating Bar Congress minutes via all the Bar’s social media platforms.
4. A cost of ₦1,000.00 was awarded in favour of the Claimant.
LEAD JUDGMENT OF HON. JUSTICE AIWINILOMO FATIMAH (PRESIDING
JUSTICE):
On the interpretation of the Section 5 Sub 5 Part D Paragraph ii of the students’ union bar
constitution 2017 as amended which provides that:
“shall cause all information concerning the activities of the Association to be disseminated
through all available effective media..”
The Apex Court in Dangana v. Usman (2013) 6 NWLR (Pt. 1349) 50 ruled that:
Where the words of a statute are clear, unambiguous and unequivocal express the intention of the lawmakers, effect must be given to them irrespective of whether that produces a harsh or an inconvenient result...
Also, in Amasike v. Registrar-Gen., C.A.C. (2006) 3 NWLR (Pt. 968) 463 Court of Appeal held that:
”Courts are enjoined to apply the literal interpretation of words where such words are used in a statute without any ambiguity. Therefore, in interpreting a law or laws the court should do so as they ought to be. [Nigerian Shippers Council v. United World Ltd. Inc. (2001) 7 NWLR (Pt. 713) 576; Onyeanusi v. Miscellaneous Offences Tribunal (2002) 12 NWLR (Pt. 781) 227 referred to.] (P. 502, paras. B-C)”
Following from the decision of Courts in the aforementioned case, I shall interpret Section 5 Sub 5 Part D Paragraph ii of the students’ union bar constitution 2017 using the literal canon of
interpretation because the section lacks ambiguity.
In Ogbonna v. A.-G., Imo State (1992) 1 NWLR (Pt. 220) 647 the Supreme Court on the the word ambiguity held that “The word ambiguity ordinarily means uncertainty or doubtful in meaning”
Ambiguity is said in Oladimeji v. Trans Nig. Ass. Co. Ltd. (1998) 12 NWLR (Pt. 576) 44
“...conveys a meaning opposite to unambiguous, can be defined as doubtfulness, doubleness of meaning, duplicity, indistinctness, or uncertainty of meaning of an expression used in a written instrument; want of clearness or definiteness; difficult to comprehend or distinguish; of doubtful import. (P. 51, paras. C-D).”
I hereby ruled that the wordings of Section 5 Sub 5 Part D Paragraph ii of the students’ union bar constitution 2017 as amended which provides that:
“shall cause all information concerning the activities of the Association to be disseminated through all available effective media..” is not ambiguous as it contains plain words without uncertainty or doubt in meaning.
  46

1. WHETHER OR NOT IT IS THE DUTY OF THE DIRECTOR OF INFORMATION TO POST THE MINUTES OF EVERY CONGRESS HELD ON THE STUDENT UNION BAR WHATSAPP GROUP.
I shall adopt the Oxford Languages Dictionary definition which refers to “All” as the whole quantity or extent of a particular group or thing.
The Collins Dictionary states that “You use all to indicate that you are referring to the whole of a particular group or thing or to everyone or everything of a particular kind.”
Merriam Webster Dictionary mentioned some common synonyms of all are entire, total, and whole. While all these words mean “including everything or everyone without exception. All may equal whole, entire, or total.
Therefore all effective media refers to all social media including the WhatApp platform of the Association. Therefore, it is the duty of the Director of Information to post minutes of every congress which by virtue of section 7 of the student union Bar constitution, the bar congress is an activity of the Bar. Thus, the director of Information is saddled with the responsibility to disseminate all information of the Association particularly; in this instant case, the minutes of the Bar Congress. He is also responsible of disseminating the minutes of the bar congress through all effective media and ‘all effective’ media as stated earlier include all or some social media.Since the minutes of the Bar Congress is only for the consumption of Bar members and not general public; the most effective media to disseminate this is the WhatApp group of the Bar that includes only the members.
2. WHETHER OR NOT THE DIRECTOR OF INFORMATION HAS FAILED TO PERFORM HER DUTY AS IT HAS BEEN LAID DOWN IN SECTION 5(5) PART D PARAGRAPH II?
In Imah v. Okogbe (1993) 9 NWLR (Pt. 316) 159, the Supreme Court on Construction of plain
words said:
Plain words must be given their plain meanings. A court indeed has no power to import into the meaning of a word something that is not in it...[Abioye v. Yakubu (1991) 5 NWLR (Pt.190) 136; Bello v. A.-G. Oyo (1986) 5 NWLR (Pt.45) 828 referred to]. (P.173, paras. D- E).
Therefore, the Student Union Bar constitution which states that the activities of the Association shall be disseminated through all effective media and the director of information has failed to post the minutes of the Bar congress on the most effective media which is the whatApp group.
This court hereby ruled that the Director of Information has failed to do her duty as laid down in Section 5(5) part D paragraph ii of the Student Union constitution.
ORDER OF THIS COURT:
This court holds all effective media includes all/one social media and mass media and in the case of minutes of the Bar Congress which is only for the members of the association consumption the most effective media for dissemination is the WhatApp platform of the Association. This court reiterate that it is the duty of the Director of Information that is saddled with the responsibility of carrying out the order of this court.
47

CONCURRENT JUDGMENT OF HON. JUSTICE ASHIMI SAOBAN ADEDAYO, JSU
My noble Lord Aiwinnilomo Fatimah, JSC afforded me the opportunity of reading before today the judgment just delivered.
Upon a careful perusal of the lead judgement of my learned brother, I completely and agreeably concur with the reasoning and inescapable conclusion reached therein by the Learned Justice on the issue and I adopt same as mine, with just a little words of mine to add to the rich analysis contained therein.
To elucidate my additional contribution, let me pontificate as follows. The primary duty of the court is to interpret the law and apply the same to the facts presented before it.
Before delving into the main issue, I will like to point out an observation made while examining the processes attached to the suit at hand.
While perusing the Claimant’s affidavit, I was exasperated with the tautology of the word ‘that’. Borrowing the dictum of my noble Lord Niki Tobi JSC (as he then was) in the case of Eze v. Okolonji (1997) 7 NWLR (Pt. 513) 515 on the insignificance of using "that" in commencing new paragraph in affidavit, it was posited that it is a style which has hardened into a tradition for a paragraph in an affidavit to commence with the now overburdened word of "that". No affidavit is regarded as good without that word. Because of the regular use of the word, an affidavit without it looks "naked", having not on it the required "clothing".
It is an unnecessary determiner which requires no further repetition. One thing I would like to add to this is that counsel can do much better.
The main provision of the Students’ Union Bar subjected to judicial scrutiny is Section 5(5) Part D Paragraph ii which states as follows:
The duties of the Director of Information shall include causing all information concerning the activities of the Association to be disseminated through all available effective media.
Howbeit, the main phrase currently in dispute between the parties to this suit is that the court is presumed to determine all available effective media.
Media, simplicita, is the organized means of communicating openly, at a distance, and to many in a short space of time. Sequel to modern day technological advancement, a quite number of media platforms ranging from television, newspapers, magazines, internet, mail among others have been developed.
Limiting the media presence of the Students’ Union Bar to social media accounts email newsletters posters and flyers , it is right to state unequivocally that WhatsApp among other social media platforms such as Instagram, X, LinkedIn, Facebook suggests an effective platform for disseminating information across Advocates.
The law's silence on specific usage of the Students’ Union Bar WhatsApp group for information dissemination is apparent beyond any conceivable question. The Defendants argued vociferously that this silence implies intentional flexibility, allowing the Bar to adapt to changing circumstances and technological advancements. It was further argued that by not specifying a particular medium, the Constitution enables innovative approaches to information dissemination.
 48

The defendants' compelling response to the Claimant's claim had merit, but ultimately fell short due to absence of substantial evidence. Although WhatsApp isn't the only platform for disseminating the minutes, the defendants' argument failed to demonstrate that the congress minutes were indeed published through another means.
Ordinarily, he who comes to equity must come with clean hands. Assuming without conceding that WhatsApp is not the sole media platform for publishing the minutes of the congress, did the Director of Information perform her mandatory duty as dictated by Section 5(5) Part D Paragraph ii at all?
My Lords, permit me to make reference to the 1st Defendant’s affidavit particularly Paragraph 6 where she averred that:
I know for a fact that proper dissemination of information concerning the activities of the students union bar is always made via all available effective media by me.
Frankly, no one disputes the fact that the averment made above is her constitutional duty. However, my main concern is had she performed the constitutional duty in question to exonerate her of liability for the breach of Section 5(5) Part D Paragraph ii of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution. As aforementioned, what could have availed the 1st Defendant is clear evidence that the minutes of the Congress was published on a different platform aside WhatsApp which the Claimant in this suit considers to be an available effective media.
On this basis, I hereby grant the 3rd, 5th & 6th reliefs of the Claimant mandating a strict compliance with the provision of the Students’ Union Bar constitution and make an order that henceforth, minutes of congress among other necessary information of the Students’ Union Bar Association should be disseminated across all the Association’s social media accounts. In addendum, the defendants are hereby ordered to pay the Claimant a sum of 1000 Naira as litigation cost.
CONCURRENT JUDGMENT OF HON. JUSTICE OMOTAYO SAMUEL, JSU
Having read in draft the opinion of my learned brother, Honourable Justice Ismail Khadijat Moromoke, CJSU on the resolution of this honourable court on the sole issue couched for determination, I agree with his reasoning and conclusion and also make no order as to cost.
APPEARANCES:
FOR THE CLAIMANT:
F. A. ADEDEJI
FOR THE DEFENDANT: M. A. AJENIFUJA AMICUS CURIAE:
E. F. ASHAOLU
P. O. OYEBANJI, SAU, SALC
