IN THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN HOLDEN AT UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN SUIT “ NO: SUC/UIL /JC /OJ/011/24-25” CITATION: (2025) 3 USLR
BEFORE THEIR LORDSHIPS
AIWINILOMO FATIMAH ADUKE JUSTICE OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT SIDEEQ ZAKARIYAH JUSTICE OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT
ASHIMI SAOBAN ADEDAYO JUSTICE OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT
ADEDEJI FAVOUR ADEYINKA................................................CLAIMANT AND
LEGAL EDUCATION COMMITTEE OF THE
STUDENTS’ UNION BAR ASSOCIATION
EXECUTIVE COUNCIL OF THE
STUDENTS’ UNION BAR ASSOCIATION....................................DEFENDANTS
RATIO DECIDENDI
In examining whether the shall in Section 8(2) part D of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution means compulsion or discretion, the provision is not to be examine in isolation, but must consider it in its context. It reads:
D. Legal Education Committee
i. shall be responsible for the promotion and advancement of legal education, advocacy and jurisprudence
In my opinion, this provision has a discretionary flavor. The court in Ajuwa v. S.P.D.C.N Ltd (2011) 18 NWLR (Pt. 1279) 797 (SC) describe discretion as a power or right conferred upon public functionaries by law or acting officially in certain circumstances according to the dictates of their own judgment and conscience, uncontrolled by the judgment or conscience of others.
In this provision, the blanket stipulation is the responsibility of promoting legal education, advocacy and jurisprudence, however, the exact or specific way of carrying out this responsibility is open to the judgment and conscience of the committee.
The words of Section 8(2) part D of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution is clear and unambiguous as it is clear that the law intend the promotion of legal education, advocacy and jurispudence and it is also not unclear that this responsibility is strictly saddled and confer on the Legal Education Committee.
NOTABLE HOLDINGS
29
1. On the power of Legal Education of Students’ Union Bar Association
The Legal education committee has the power to analyses, appraise, assess, choose, consider, contemplate, decide, determine, elect, evaluate, examine how to fulfill the responsibility saddled on them by the constitution. They have free will, freedom of choice, liberty of choosing, liberty of judgment, license, option, permission, power of choosing, review, right of choice to pick or select any form or act to promote and advance legal education, advocacy and jurisprudence.- PER FATIMAH ADUKE AIWINNILOMO, JSU
2. On the meaning of shall
The use of the word 'shall' indeed signifies a compulsory obligation as cited in relevant authorities by my learned brothers. However, the Students' Union Bar Constitution deliberately refrains from prescribing any specific methodology for the discharge of this duty. This silence of the drafters is not an oversight but a deliberate granting of autonomy and flexibility to the Legal Education Committee. The drafters of the constitution recognized that the landscape of legal education is dynamic and ever-evolving and imposing a rigid framework of activities could stifle innovation and limit the committee's ability to adapt to the most effective means of promoting legal learning.- PER SIDEEQ ZAKARIYAH ,JSU
JUDGEMENT AND ORDER
The discretionary mandate of the constitution allows for more than one way for the promotion and advancement of legal education, advocacy and jurisprudence. This court implores the legal education committee to adopt more means of fulfilling it responsibility such as organizing the bar quiz night or any other method appropriate in the judgment of the committee.
This court ordered the defendant to pay a sum of one thousand Naira to the registrar of this court on or before 12th of May, 2025 for the non-compliance with the court ruling to file the defense at the appropriate date and time.
COURT RECORDS
The case filed against the Legal Education Committee of the Students’ union Bar and the Executive of the Students’ Union Bar bothers on a fact that the Students’ Union Bar has stopped organizing the Thursday Night Quiz. The claimant in his brief argued that the defendants have breached the provision of Section 8(2) part D of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution.
The section the claimant claims the defendant breach saddled the 1st defendant the responsibility of promoting and advancing legal education, advocacy and jurisprudence. The claimant argued that the word shall used in Section 8(2) part D of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution means compulsion and mandatories.
The claimant in his brief couched a sole issue of “whether or not the legal education committee has failed to perform her duty as it has been laid down in section 8(2) part D of the students’ union bar constitution 2017 as amended (2018)”
In his written address that was stratified into 2 standpoints:
i. Whether or not the defendant has a mandatory duty to promote and advance legal education
Relying on the case of TABIK INVESTMENT LTD.& ANOR V GTB PLC(2011) JELR 47719 (SC) which held that shall connote mandatory discharge of a duty or obligation...
30

He concluded that it is the duty of the legal education committee to organize the students’ union bar quiz which holds on the students’ bar group.
On the second standpoint which is:
ii. Whether or not the defendant has failed to perform her duty.
The claimant argued that Section 8(2) part D of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution should be given a literal meaning and that the principle of literal meaning must be followed unless it will lead to absurdity and inconsistency with the provisions of the statute as a whole has held in CHIEF AWOLOWO V. ALHAJI SHAGARI (1979) 6-9 SC 51.
He concluded that there was a clear breach of the provision has he has been deprived of his right to legal education.
The defendants in his defense adopted the issue of the claimant and argued that, there is no constitutional obligatory duty vested on the defendants to host the bar quiz night. Relying on CAPTAIN ECC AMADI V NIGERIAN NATIONAL PETROLEUM CORPORATION (2000) 10 NWLR (PT 674) the word shall can sometimes means mandatory and at other times directory, depending on the context. He argued that paragragh 2 of the defendant affidavit which read thus “I know as a matter of fact that the student union quiz night is an initiative of the executive council and the legal education committee” is a mere initiative not a compulsory duty.
The defendants concluded that the constitution is silent on specific methods of promoting legal education and submits that the defendants has no constitutional duty to organize bar quiz night and thus has not breach the constitution,
LEAD JUGEMENT OF HON. JUSTICE AIWINNILOMO FATIMAH
I have read the brief of both parties and the particular section of the bar constitution that is in contention. It is quite obligatory on me to juxtapose between shall that means mandatory and the one that mean directory.
In KALLAMU V. GURIN (2003) 16 NWLR (PT. 847) 493 the court of Appeal held on meaning of “shall” in a statute that
“The word “shall” when used in a statute or rule of court makes it mandatory that the rule must be observed. It is a word of command and denotes an obligation thereby giving no room for discretion. Simply put, it imposes a duty. [Mokelu v. Federal Commissioner for Works & Housing (1979) 3 SC 35; Aroyewun v. Adebanji (1976) 11 SC 33; Ifezue v. Mbadugha (1984) 1SCNLR427; Katto v. Central Bank of Nigeria (1991) 9 NWLR (Pt. 214) 126 referred to.] (P. 517, paras. E-G)”
However, the meaning of shall can sometimes derogate from mandatory or compulsion. The court in UNEGBU V. UNEGBU (2004) 11 NWLR (PT. 884) 332
“The word “shall” when used in an enactment is capable of bearing many meanings. It may be implying futurity or implying a mandatory sense or directory sense. If used in a mandatory sense, the action to be taken must obey or fulfil the mandate exactly. However, if used in a directory sense, then the action to be taken is to obey or fulfil the directive substantially... [Ifezue v.
 31

Mbadugha (1984) 1 SCNLR 427; State v. Ilori (1983) 1 SCNLR 94; Amadi v. NNPC (2000) 10 NWLR (Pt. 674) 76 referred to.] (P. 356, paras. E-G)”
If the word shall is followed by a definite or specified act it is compulsion, however, the word shall followed by a blanket words or act that may be achieved by various ways; such shall is in it directory format.
In examining whether the shall in Section 8(2) part D of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution means compulsion or discretion, the provision is not to be examine in isolation, but must consider it in its context. It reads:
D. Legal Education Committee
i. shall be responsible for the promotion and advancement of legal education, advocacy and jurisprudence
In my opinion, this provision has a discretionary flavor. The court in Ajuwa v. S.P.D.C.N Ltd (2011) 18 NWLR (Pt. 1279) 797 (SC) describe discretion as a power or right conferred upon public functionaries by law or acting officially in certain circumstances according to the dictates of their own judgment and conscience, uncontrolled by the judgment or conscience of others.
In this provision, the blanket stipulation is the responsibility of promoting legal education, advocacy and jurisprudence, however, the exact or specific way of carrying out this responsibility is open to the judgment and conscience of the committee.
The words of Section 8(2) part D of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution is clear and unambiguous as it is clear that the law intend the promotion of legal education, advocacy and jurispudence and it is also not unclear that this responsibility is strictly saddled and confer on the Legal Education Committee.
However, it is pertinent to mention that the provision of section 8(2) part D of the constitution is mandatory but not specific as it gives room for freedom or power to decide what should be done in a particular situation - Akinyemi v. Odua Inv. Co. Ltd. (2012) 17 NWLR (Pt. 1329) 209(SC)
The Legal education committee has the power to analyses, appraise, assess, choose, consider, contemplate, decide, determine, elect, evaluate, examine how to fulfill the responsibility saddled on them by the constitution. They have free will, freedom of choice, liberty of choosing, liberty of judgment, license, option, permission, power of choosing, review, right of choice to pick or select any form or act to promote and advance legal education, advocacy and jurisprudence.
For the purpose of understanding, I shall couched 3 issues for determination:
1. Whether or not the legal education committee has the mandatory duty to promote and advance legal education?
2. Whether or not the defendant has the constitutional obligation to host her bar quiz night?
3. Whether or not the 1st defendant has breached the provision of the constitution?
On the first issue Whether or not the legal education committee has the mandatory duty to promote and advance legal education? In the case of OKOROCHA V U.B.A PLC. (2011) 1 NWLR (PT.1228) 348 (CA) the court held that “where the word in a statutory provisions are clear and unambiguous, the words must be accorded their literal and natural meanings...”
32

It is clear that the use of shall connote the mandatory obligation on the legal education committee to advance legal education but it leaves it to the discretion of the committee to embark on any act to fulfill that responsibility.
The court in OKOROCHA V. U.B.A. PLC (2011) 1 NWLR (PT. 1228) 348 laid down the fact that:
‘no universal rule can be laid down for determining whether provisions of a statute are mandatory or directory; in each case, the intention of the legislature must be ascertained by looking at the whole scope of the statute and, in particular, at the importance of the provisions in question in relation to the general object to be secured. [Amokeodo v. I.G.P. (1999) 6 NWLR (Pt. 607) 467 referred to.] (P. 376, paras. A-C)’
Applying this ruling to this instance case, the intention of the legislators is to advance legal education, advocacy and jurisprudence and any act followed by the committee in fulfillment of the intention is relevant in ascertaining the mandatories of the provision.
On the second issue, Whether or not the defendant has the constitutional obligation to host her bar quiz night?
Following from the above cases and submission, the defendant has no constitutional duty to host the bar quiz night. The defendants has the discretionary power to fulfill the provision of Section 8(2) part D of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution and he is not confine to one method and has free will to choose between methods in fulfilling the constitutional duty. In F.B.N. PLC V. AGBARA (2015) 8 NWLR (PT. 1460) 47 the court held that:
“Discretion is a power or right conferred upon public functionaries by law for acting officially in certain circumstances according to the dictates of their own judgment and conscience, uncontrolled by the judgment or conscience of others... [Ajuwa v. S.P.D.C.N. Ltd. (2011) 18 NWLR (Pt. 1279)797 referred to.] (P. 70, paras. C-F”)
In the judgment and conscience of the legal education committee if the bar quiz night is not applicable or useful in the fulfillment of the statutory then so be it. There is no compulsion to a method rather flexibility to choose between methods as far as the responsibility saddled by the constitution is obeyed.
On the third issue for determination, Whether or not the 1st defendant has breached the provision of the constitution?
The legal education committee has not breached the provision of the constitution. The constitution is silence on method implies flexibility in discharging the duty. The defendant in the written address in support of their defense brought it to the notice of this court that an alternative means of JUDY legal and Nigeria weekly report subscription has been made to advance legal education, advocacy and jurisprudence. In my view, the responsibility of the committee has been fulfilled.
I hereby ruled that the discretionary mandate of the constitution allows for more than one way for the promotion and advancement of legal education, advocacy and jurisprudence. This court implores the legal education committee to adopt more means of fulfilling it responsibility such as organizing the bar quiz night or any other method appropriate in the judgment of the committee.
33

This court ordered the defendant to pay a sum of one thousand Naira to the registrar of this court on or before 12th of May, 2025 for the non-compliance with the court ruling to file the defense at the appropriate date and time.
HONORABLE JUSTICE SIDEEQ ZAKARIYAH (CONCURING JUDGEMENT)
I concur with the well-articulated position of my learned brother, Hon. Justice Fatimah Aiwinnilomo Aduke. The crux of this matter lies in the interpretation of the constitutional duty of the Legal Education Committee of the Student Union Bar. On whether or not the committee has failed to perform its constitutional duty as outlined in Section 8(2)(D) of the Students' Union Bar Constitution 2017 (2018 as amended). The constitution mandates the committee to be responsible for the promotion and advancement of legal education, advocacy, and jurisprudence.
The use of the word 'shall' indeed signifies a compulsory obligation as cited in relevant authorities by my learned brothers. However, the Students' Union Bar Constitution deliberately refrains from prescribing any specific methodology for the discharge of this duty. This silence of the drafters is not an oversight but a deliberate granting of autonomy and flexibility to the Legal Education Committee. The drafters of the constitution recognized that the landscape of legal education is dynamic and ever-evolving and imposing a rigid framework of activities could stifle innovation and limit the committee's ability to adapt to the most effective means of promoting legal learning.
It is evident from the submissions and supporting affidavit that the Legal Education Committee has indeed taken proactive steps to fulfill its constitutional mandate with the initiative of subscribing to a valuable legal resource known as JUDY Legal and Nigeria weekly Law Report subscription. This subscription directly contributes to the promotion of advocacy and the advancement of legal education, advocacy, and jurisprudence.
The principle of substantial compliance, as elucidated by the Court of Appeal in cases such as OKONKWO V. OKONKWO (2017) LPELR-43614(CA), supports the view that where the essence of a mandatory duty is fulfilled, strict adherence to a non-prescribed method is not always required. In this instance case, the subscription to relevant legal resources demonstrates a clear commitment to achieving the constitutional objective. Also, the decision in NNPC v. FAMFA OIL LTD (2012) 17 NWLR (Pt. 1326) 209 which underscores the importance of considering the substance rather than mere form. The Legal Education Committee, by utilizing these alternative means has in substance fulfilled its constitutional duty to promote legal education.
In view of this, I hereby concur entirely with the judgment of my learned brother on the position that the constitutional duty of the Students' Union Bar 2017 (2018 as amended), Section 8(2)(D), has not been breached. The committee employing an alternative means such as the JUDY Legal and Nigeria Weekly Law Report subscriptions have sufficiently fulfilled its constitutional duty to promote and advance legal education, advocacy, and jurisprudence.
HONORABLE JUSTICE ASHIMI SAOBAN ADEDAYO (CONCURING JUDGEMENT)
Having read in draft the opinion of my learned brother, Honurable Justice Aiwinnilomo Fatimah, JSU on the judgement of this honourable court, I agree with his reasoning and conclusion and make no order as to cost.
