1 | P a g e  
 
AJADI HUSSEIN KEHINDE V THE EXECUTIVE 
PRESIDENT, L.S.S. 
CITATION: (2020) LCELR 2020002 
In the Law Students’ Society Court Of Unilorin 
ON THE 16TH OF MARCH, 2021 
Suit No: LSSJ/007/2020 
Before Their Lordships: 
Hon. Judge Muhammed Shuaib Oladimeji JLSS (presided) 
Hon. Judge Tunji-Lawal Lawal Bolaji, JLSS 
Hon. Judge Jamiu Ridwan JLSS 
BETWEEN 
 
AJADI HUSSEIN KEHINDE 
Claimant 
And 
THE PRESIDENT, LAW STUDENTS’ SOCIETY 
Defendant 
 
 
 
RATIO DECIDENDI 
1. EVIDENCE – ON THE CONTENT OF AN AFFIDAVIT: Although, as contended by 
the claimant counsel, affidavit contains only facts within the knowledge of the deponent 
or that which he believes to be true based on information received by him according to 
section 115 of E.A, the section does not intend to limit the depone nt not to acquire 
relevant information that will benefit or prove his claim. Where facts, the collection of 
which disclose a reasonable cause of action is not collectively supplied to the extent that 
it left out the crux of the fact or facts upon which the  other fact relied, it will steal away 
the reasonableness of the cause of action even though if there exist a cause of action . 
PER SHUAIB, JLSS 
2. Jurisdiction – ON THE FUNDAMENTALITY OF THE ISSUE OF 
JURISDICTION: It is a trite principle, that the ever recurring vexed issue of jurisdiction 
is not merely important, but very fundamental. Thus, it ought to be accorded the highest 

2 | P a g e  
 
degree of consideration and priority over and above any other issue. This is definitely so , 
because where a court embarks upon a decision in any given matter without the requisite 
jurisdiction, that decision is null and void, and liable to be set aside. See AJEWOLE 
OLAMIDE SAMUEL V. THE SPEAKER, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVE LAW 
STUDENTS SOCIETY ANOR  suit no: LSSJ/013/2019, CHRISTOPHER OKEKE 
v. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMMISSION & ORS. (2013) AELR 1500 
(CA). Jurisdiction is everything, and without jurisdict ion, this action cannot survive . 
Although, there exist s a juristic person who can make the claim and a juristic person 
against whom the court can make an enforceable order, however, lack of sufficient 
factual situation which will enable the court to inquire into the claim of the claimant rip 
off the jurisdicti onal garment of this court.  Jurisdiction is a crucial question of 
competence, a proceeding is or remains a nullity ab initio and a judgment is void where a 
court does not have the jurisdiction to hear it however well conducted and brilliantly 
decided they might be, as a defect in competence is not intrinsic but rather extrinsic to the 
entire adjudication. See INAKOJU V. Adeleke  N.W.L.R PT. 836 P. 69 . PER 
SHUAIB, JLSS 
3. JURISDICTION – ON THE LSS COURT JURISDICTION : Although section 35 of 
LSS constitution confers on this court the Jurisdiction to hear and determine civil cases 
between or among the member and/or officer or body or corporation subject to LSS 
CONSTITUTION, however such Jurisdiction can only be exercised a upon fulfilment of 
conditions precedent to its exercise: cause of action is one of such condition A cause of 
action is the operative fact or facts (the factual situation) which give rise to a right of 
action. That is, it is the fact or combination of facts, which gives rise to a right to sue. For 
a cause of action to arise, there must be; A juristic person who can make the claim and a 
juristic person against whom the court can make an enforceable order  A factual situation 
which will enable the court to in quire existence of a right and its infringement.  It is only 
when a person who can sue and a person who can be sued and facts establishing a civil 
right or obligation and facts establishing infraction or trespass on that right and obligation 
exist side by s ide, that a cause of action is said to accrue. See CONSOLIDATED 
RESOURCES LTD VS. ABOFAR VENTURES NIG LTD (2007) 6 NWLR (Pt 1030) 
221, 294 AND OSIGWE vs. PSPLS MANAGEMENT CONSORTIUM LTD (2009) 
171 LRCN 94, 111. PER SHUAIB, JLSS 
4. PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE  - CAUSE OF ACTION AND RIGHT OF 
ACTION: Alternating right of action for cause of action, vice versa, the error of treating 
the duo as identical twins is often times committed not only  by counsels but also by the 
gentlemen of the press. It has been pontificate d in long line of authorities that cause of 
action and right of action are diverse. One is not synonym of the other. Although, they 
are companions for the two must co -exist before a common man call upon a court to be 
his last hope.  Before a party approache s a court for a redress, his counsel owns him the 
duty to ensure that there is a cause of action cognizable in law. See NOKIA WEST 
AFRICA (NIGERIA) LTD V. MR WILLIAM’S ORIOHA (2SHOTZ) LCN/8367 
CA.; THOMAS V. OLUFOSOYE [1986] 1 N.W.L.R.  He does not stop there, he must 
as well determine if there is a sufficient interest in favour of his client to commence the 
suit. The pet expression for this is right of action or locus standi. A party may have a right 
of action but have his case devoid o f the requisite cause of action. The converse is also 
possible where a cause of action will be present and a right of action cannot be fished out. 

3 | P a g e  
 
The former is the cobweb in which the action of the claimant/respondent has been 
entangled. He cannot set himself free except with the tool of having a reasonable cause of 
action. See DASUKI AHMAD AND 1 ORS. V. HUMAN RIGHTS CHAMBERS 
AND OTHERS, SUIT NO. LSSJ/005/2018. PER JAMIU JLSS 
 
RULING ON THE DEFENDANT’S PRELIMINARY OBJECTION 
MUHAMMED SHUAIB JLSS (delivering  the lead ruling): This action was commenced by 
originating summons brought pursuant to order 2 rule 2(1) of the law students’ society court 
rules 2018 and under the inherent jurisdiction of this honourable court where by two issues were 
formulated via; 
1. Whether or not a congress can proceed without forming a quorum? 
2. Whether a constitutional provision can be waived at the discretion of the congress? 
The claimant prays for; 
1. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that a congress cannot in any 
way proceed unless a quorum is formed. 
2. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT  that forming quorum at 
congresses is a condition precedent. 
3. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT  that a constitutional 
provision is supreme and as such cannot be waived at the instance of the congress. 
4. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the action of the 
President of the LAW STUDENTS’ SOCIETY was ultra vires. 
5. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the doctrine of necessity 
is not applicable in this instance. 
6. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT mandating the president to paste a 
written apology on all notice boards in the faculty for egregiously flouting the sacred 
provisions of the constitution. 
7. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT  mandating the defendant to pay the 
sum of Two Thousand Naira to the claimant and the cost of this litigation. 
8. AND FOR SUCH OTHER ORDERS AND DECLARATIONS THIS 
HONOURABLE COURT MAY DEEM FIT IN THE CIRCUMSTANCE OF THIS  
CASE. 

4 | P a g e  
 
On 10th day of March, 2021, the claimant counsel adopted the originating summons together 
with the accompanying documents. On 15th of March, 2021, by preliminary objection brought 
pursuant to order 3 rule 2 of the law students’ society court rules 2 019, the defendant challenged 
the jurisdiction of this court to hear and determine this suit on grounds that; 
1. That the affidavit in support of the claimant’s originating summons does not disclose a 
reasonable cause of action. 
2. That the claimant lacks a reasonable cause of action. 
3. That premised on the above, the case of the claimant is grossly incompetent and 
fundamentally defective in law. 
4. That this Honourable Court lacks jurisdiction to entertain this case.  
And pray for; 
1. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABL E COURT that the affidavit in support 
of the claimant’s originating summons does not disclose a reasonable cause of action. 
2. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT  striking out this suit for want of 
jurisdiction. 
3. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT mandating the claimant to pay a sum 
of Two Thousand Naira to the defendant within three days of the determination of this 
preliminary objection, as the cost of this litigation. 
4. AND FOR SUCH FURTHER ORDER[S]  as this Honourable Court may deem fit to 
make in the circumstances of this case. 
A sole issue was couched; Whether or not this Honourable Court has the requisite jurisdiction to 
entertain the case of the claimant.  
Counsel submitted that this Honourable Court does not have the requisite jurisdiction to entertain 
the case of the claimant and further stratified his argument on two stand points: 
1. The suit, as filed by the claimant discloses no cause of action on the claimant. 
2. That at such, this Honourable Court lacks jurisdiction to entertain this matter. 
On the first stand point, counsel submitted that a cause of action is facts or set of facts that 
warrant a party to approach the court in order to seek legal remedy or reliefs and rely on the 
cases of KATOL INVESTMENT LTD V. TAJ DEVELOPMENT CO. LTD & ORS (2018) 
LPELR-46483 (CA), DASUKI AHMAD & ANOR V. HUMAN RIGHTS CHAMBERS & 
ORS (2019) 1 LSSCLR 1. 

5 | P a g e  
 
Counsel further argued that to determine whether a party has a cause of action, the claimant’s 
originating process is considered, particularly the claimant’s affidavit,  while making reference to  
claimant’s affidavit, particularly paragraph 8, defendant counsel/applicant submitted that no 
reasonable cause of action has been disclosed on ground that that  claimant only avers that the 
quorum of the said congress was not formed but fai led to stipulate neither the total members of 
the Law Students’ Society in the said semester, nor the number of members of who were in 
attendance at the said congress; fact that are  necessary to ascertain  whether or not a quorum of 
1/6 members, as stipulated under Section 58 of the LSS Constitution was formed. They relied on 
[EGBE V. ADEFARASIN (1987) 1 NWLR 47, 1 @ 20, AJADI HUSSIEN KEHINDE V. 
THE LORD ACTIVIST, HUMAN RIGHTS CHAMBERS & ANOR, SUIT NO: 
LSSJ/001/2020.] 
They further submitted that it is not the duty or function of the court to embark on a voyage of 
discovery but to adjudicate upon specific matters or issues in dispute raised by the parties 
themselves in their respective pleadings and behooves a party that assert to prove. Reliance was 
placed on [BAYO AREMU V. DANIEL GEORGE CHUKWU (2011) LCN/4594 (CA); 
LIPEDE V. SONEKAN (1995) 1 NWLR (pt. 374) 668], OWENA MASS 
TRANSPORTATION CO LTD V. OKONOGBO (2018) LPELR-45221 
On the second standpoint, it was submitted that this Honourable court lacks the jur isdiction to 
entertain this matter. They argued that a cause of action must arise on the part of the claimant to 
invoke the jurisdiction of a competent court of law, where there is no reasonable cause of action, 
the court, it robbs the court of its Jurisdi ction. They refer the court to the cases of  DREXEL 
ENERGY & NATURAL RESOURCES LTD & ORS V. TRANS INTERNATIONAL 
BANK LTD & ORS (2008) 18 NWLR (PT. 1119) 388; RINCO CONSTRUCTION CO. 
LTD V. VEE PEE IND. LTD & ANOR (2005) 9 NWLR (PT. 929) 85] 
On the whole, it  was submitted that the claimant’s suit is grossly incompetent because it 
discloses no reasonable cause of action thereby robbing the Court of the requisite jurisdiction to 
entertain this case. It was urged that the court strike out this case in its entirety.  
The claimant/respondent relied to the preliminary objection and adopted the sole issue as 
couched by the applicant and the standpoints as stratified 
On the first standpoint, the respondent submitted that cause of action shows sufficient interest of 
the litigation in a case, a group of operative fact giving rise to one or more basis for suing. It is 

6 | P a g e  
 
constitutionally vested to the claimant in a case as long as he shows the wishes to ensure the 
compliance of any person or authority to the provision of the  constitution. Reliance was placed 
on the cases of ADEDIMEJI QUAYYIM ABDUL-AFEEZ AND ANOR V. PRESIDENT OF 
LAW STUDENT SOCIETY LSSJ/012/2019.  Counsel further argued that joint reading of 
section 4(5), section 5 and section 7 (4)(5) of the LSS constitution,  the claimant being a 
member of Law student society has right to compel any person or authority to conform with the 
aims and objective set out in chapter 2 of the LSS constitution. Counsel argued replying on 
paragraph 2,3,4,5 and 9 affidavit attached to the  claimant originating summons. In addition, it 
was submitted that the affidavit are meant to contain what is within the personal knowledge of 
the deponent or what he believes to be true. He relied on section 115 (1) of Evidence Act.  He 
argued that the clai mant neither has the knowledge of the exact number of the people present at 
the Congress nor is he required to know the exact number of the people present as against what 
should be the quorum, instead it is the duty of the secretary general of Lss to keep proper record 
of such fact and figures. However he was sure that the quorum was not formed because he was 
present at the congress which made him believes so. 
On the second standpoint, he submitted relying on international NIGERBUILD 
CONSTRUCTION LTD V. GIW A 2003 13 NWLR PT 836 P. 36  that the jurisdiction of the 
court should be jealously protected and not allowed to be robbed by any frivolous actions. 
Relying on the first standpoint that the claimant has reasonable cause of action, counsel 
submitted that hav ing certified the conditions for the exercise of Jurisdiction of this court as 
stated in the case of MADUKOLU V. NKEMDILIN(1962) 2 SC NLR 341,  this court has 
Jurisdiction as court of first instance to entertain this suit. It was prayed that the strike out the 
preliminary objection for lack of merit. 
The applicant replied on point of law distinguishing between cause of action and right of action 
to the effect that section 7(4) cited by the respondent confers right of action and not cause of 
action. The case of MADAM HABIBAT AMOPE V. MALAM SALIU GAMBARI 2013 
AELR 2748 was called to aid. 
In my consideration of the preliminary objection, I shall adopt the issues as couched by the 
parties as it is sufficient enough to dispose of the contention of the parties. 
1. Whether or not this Honourable Court has Jurisdiction to entertain this suit 

7 | P a g e  
 
It is a trite principle, that the ever recurring vexed issue of jurisdiction is not merely important, 
but very fundamental. Thus, it ought to be accorded the highest degree of con sideration and 
priority over and above any other issue. This is definitely so, because where a court embarks 
upon a decision in any given matter without the requisite jurisdiction, that decision is null and 
void, and liable to be set aside. See AJEWOLE OLAMIDE SAMUEL V. THE SPEAKER, 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVE LAW STUDENTS SOCIETY ANOR suit no: 
LSSJ/013/2019, CHRISTOPHER OKEKE v. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE 
COMMMISSION & ORS. (2013) AELR 1500 (CA). 
Although section 35 of LSS constitution confers on this court the J urisdiction to hear and 
determine civil cases between or among the member and/or officer or body or corporation 
subject to LSS CONSTITUTION, however such Jurisdiction can only be exercised a upon 
fulfilment of conditions precedent to its exercise: cause of action is one of such condition 
 A cause of action is the operative fact or facts (the factual situation) which give rise to a right of 
action. That is, it is the fact or combination of facts, which gives rise to a right to sue. For a cause 
of action to arise, there must be;  
i. A juristic person who can make the claim and a juristic person against whom the court can 
make an enforceable order 
ii. A factual situation which will enable the court to inquire existence of a right and its 
infringement. 
It is only when a person who can sue and a person who can be sued and facts establishing a civil 
right or obligation and facts establishing infraction or trespass on that right and obligation exist 
side by side, that a cause of action is said to accrue. See CONSOLIDATED R ESOURCES 
LTD VS. ABOFAR VENTURES NIG LTD (2007) 6 NWLR (Pt 1030) 221, 294 AND 
OSIGWE vs. PSPLS MANAGEMENT CONSORTIUM LTD (2009) 171 LRCN 94, 111. 
A question that begs for determination is whether the claimant has cause of action to institute this 
action. T he answer is easy considering the affidavit in support of the originating summons 
deposed to by claimant deposed to the fact that a quorum was not formed at the congress held on 
the 9th of January, 2020 and the President proceeded with the congress with le ss members of 
LSS not forming the quorum, without further stating the number of people present and the total 
number of the law student society in other for the court to determine whether has quorum has 

8 | P a g e  
 
been formed or not. This in the opinion of this court are necessary facts to prove the assertion 
that a quorum has not been formed. 
Although, as contended by the claimant counsel, affidavit contains only facts within the 
knowledge of the deponent or that which he believes to be true based on information recei ved by 
him according to section 115 of E.A, the section does not intend to limit the deponent not to 
acquire relevant information that will benefit or prove his claim. Luckily, the claimant’s counsel 
knows the custodial of record of members of the society,  it behooves a member who truly seek 
for the enforcement and compliance with the rule of the society to acquire facts that will make a 
cause of action reasonable in order to further vest in the court, the jurisdiction. Where facts, the 
collection of which disclose a reasonable cause of action is not collectively supplied to the extent 
that it left out the crux of the fact or facts upon which the other fact relied, it will steal away the 
reasonableness of the cause of action even though if there exist a caus e of action. Based on the 
foregoing, it is the opinion of this court that the claimant affidavit has not sufficiently disclose 
necessary fact to constitute a reasonable cause of action  
Before you ask me effect of lack of reasonable cause of action on juri sdiction, let me quickly 
restate the important of jurisdiction: Jurisdiction is everything, and without jurisdiction, this 
action cannot survives. Although, there exist a juristic person who can make the claim and a 
juristic person against whom the court c an make an enforceable order, however, lack of 
sufficient factual situation which will enable the court to inquire into the claim of the claimant 
rip off the jurisdictional garment of this court. In effect, this action is a poison for this court and 
the court will not hesitate to throw it in recycle bin for recycling. The issue is resolved in favour 
of the defendant. 
This court finds the preliminary objection meritorious and strike out this case for lack of 
jurisdiction, all other prayers are thereby refused.  
 
OPINION OF JAMIU RIDWAN ADENIYI, JLSS ; I have had the opportunity to read in 
advance, the  daft of the ruling just delivered by learned law lord and brother, Muhammed 
Shuaib Oladimeji, JLSS, I agree with his reasoning and conclusion.  
If there is any other thing, I want to say, it will, to my mind, amount to restating the erudition 
that has been exhausted in the lead ruling and I do not want to engage in an unnecessary 
repetitive exercise. I do not like it. But, since this honourable te mple of justice is not only 

9 | P a g e  
 
revered for being a lover of substantial justice but also as an institution for continuing legal 
education, I have decided to add a token to the lead ruling. 
The fulcrum of the defendant/applicant’s preliminary objection hovers around the question of 
jurisdiction on the ground that the plaintiff/respondent’s case does not disclose a reasonable 
cause of action. A condition precedent for a court’s jurisdiction to be invoked. Let me start with 
the issue of jurisdiction. 
Jurisdiction is a crucial question of competence, a proceeding is or remains a nullity ab initio and 
a judgment is void where a court does not have the jurisdiction to hear it however well conducted 
and brilliantly decided they might be, as a defect in competence is n ot intrinsic but rather 
extrinsic to the entire adjudication. See INAKOJU V. ADELEKE [2007] 4 N.W.L.R PT. 1025, 
P. 423; INTERNATIONAL NIGERBUILD CONST. CO. LTD V. GIWA [2003] 13 
N.W.L.R PT. 836 P. 69 
As a general rule, when a court is faced with the questi on of determining jurisdiction, the 
relevant process that is considered is the statement of claim. However, the court must also 
consider the defence if filed when the issue is that of jurisdiction of the court to hear and 
determine the matter. This is the law and nothing else. See. DIAMOND BANK LTD V. 
UGOCHUKWU [2016] ALL FWLR PT. 845 PGA 49 SC. 
As this case is commenced by an Originating Summons, where no substantial facts have been 
alleged to be in dispute, the court considers the affidavit in support of the motion as the 
necessary court process to be used.  
Having stated the above elementary laws, the metric that this court considered, as it has been 
beautifully set out in the lead ruling, on the question of whether reasonable cause of action is to 
see if it can be gleaned from the claimant’s originating summons and the court is emphatic that 
the claimant’s affidavit discloses neither a cause of action nor a reasonable one. 
During the hearing of the interlocutory application, the counsel to the claimant/respondent was 
making a big whether out of Section 7 (4) of the Constitution of the Law Students’ Society, a 
provision that settles the members of the society's right of actio n. He was alternating right of 
action for cause of action, vice versa. The error of treating the duo as identical twins is often 
times committed not only counsels but also by the gentlemen of the press. It has been 
pontificated in long line of authorities that cause of action and right of action are diverse. One is 

10 | P a g e  
 
not synonym of the other. Although, they are companions for the two must co -exist before a 
common man call upon a court to be his last hope. 
Before a party approaches a court for a redress, his c ounsel owns him the duty to ensure that 
there is a cause of action cognizable in law. See NOKIA WEST AFRICA (NIGERIA) LTD V. 
MR WILLIAM’S ORIOHA (2SHOTZ) LCN/8367 CA.; THOMAS V. OLUFOSOYE 
[1986] 1 N.W.L.R.  He does not stop there, he must as well determine if there is a sufficient 
interest in favour of his client to commence the suit. The pet expression for this is right of action 
or locus standi. 
A party may have a right of action but have his case devoid of the requisite cause of action. The 
converse is also possible,where a cause of action will be present and a right of action cannot be 
fished out. The former is the cobweb in which the action of the claimant/respondent has been 
entangled. He cannot set himself free except with the tool of having a reasonab le cause of action. 
See DASUKI AHMAD AND 1 ORS. V. HUMAN RIGHTS CHAMBERS AND OTHERS, 
SUIT NO. LSSJ/005/2018 
I think I have to stop here and I hope my prolixity will be pardoned. I found the 
defendant/applicant's preliminary objection meritorious and the cl aimant’s case must, therefore, 
be struck out and it is hereby struck out. This will give the claimant another opportunity to refile 
the action by amending the action to fall in line with the jurisdiction of this court where it was 
initially filed. By this,  the claimant is given another opportunity to have a second bite at the 
cherry. The law does not frown at it. 
 
APPEARANCES 
Claimant Counsels   Defendant’s Counsels Amicus 
Q.AAdedimeji    P.O Daniel  Asiwaju Mustapha Adetoyebi SAU 
M.T Sa’d   H.T. Usman   AkanniKamaldeen 
I.S Ibrahim   A. A. AbdulAzeez  T.H Jamiu 
A.O Habeeb       L.O Okwara 
I.O Kolawoe 
B.I Bello-Oniyo 
A. I. Muhammed Rabiu 
M. A. O. Onikeke 

11 | P a g e  
 
 