1 | P a g e  
 
AJADI HUSEEIN KEHINDE V LORD ACTIVIST, 
HUMAN RIGHTS CHAMBERS & ANOR 
CITATION: (2020) LCELR 2020004 
In the Law Students’ Society Court Of Unilorin 
ON THE 9TH DAY OF DECEMBER, 2019 
Suit No: LSSJ/001/2020 
Before Their Lordships: 
1. Hon. Judge Abdulkareem Abdurrazzaq Ketu CJLSS (Presided and Read Lead Judgment) 
2. Hon. Judge Salam Abdulsalam Opeyemi JLSS,  
3. Hon. Judge Jamiu Ridwan Adeniyi JLSS 
BETWEEN 
AJADI HUSSEIN KEHINDE 
Claimant 
AND       
THE LORD ACTIVIST, HUMAN RIGHTS CHAMBERS 
HUMAN RIGHTS CHAMBERS 
Defendants 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 | P a g e  
 
RATIO DECIDENDI 
1. INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES  - ON HOW WO RDS AS USED I N 
STATUTE SHOULD BE INTERPRETED : It is trite principle of law and rule of 
grammar that each word will have its operation meaning within the context of their usage, 
see that case of DAGBO V. FIN. SEC. HUMAN RIGHTS CHAMBERS (2019) 1 
LSSCLR, AJEWOLE SAMUEL V. SPEAKER, LSS HOUSE OF REPS & ANOR 
(2019) 1 LSSCLR.  In the same line, statutes are not to be interpreted in isolation but 
holistic and all encompassing construction should be deployed to reveal the intention of 
the law drafter. See that case of DASUKI & ANOR V. HUMAN RIGHT CHAMBERS 
& 3 ORS. (2019) 1 LSSCLR, SESAN V. JUDICIARY, LSS (2019) 1 LSSCLR.  - 
HON JUDGE ABDULKAREEM ABDULRAZAQ KETU CJLSS  
2. INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES - EMPHASIS ON THE L ITERAL RULE OF 
INTERPRETATION: It is trite and well settled law that where the wordings of the law 
are crystal than clear, its original and natural meaning are to be given to it, in 
interpretation. I rely on NYAKO V. ADAMAWA STATE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY 
& ORS ( 2016) LPELR -41822(SC) and SALAM ABDULSALAM V. THE 
EXECUTIVE COUNCIL, LAW STUDENTS’ SOCIETY AND ANOR SUIT NO: 
SUJ/001/18-19. Thus, in construing the provision of a statute, where the wordings are 
clear and unambiguous, it is the words used that prevail and not what the judge says the 
provision mean. In fact, no court is entitled to substitute its words for the words of the 
statute. See AWUSE V. ODILI (supra)  - HON JUDGE SALAM ABDUSSALAM 
OPEYEMI JLSS 
3. LOCUS STANDI - ON WHAT CONSTITUTE LOCUS STANDI : It is an a ged 
principle of law that locus standi devolves upon a person that has sustained special or 
pecuniary damage far and above any other person in the society. However, in a 
constitution matter, any person who is able to prove that he is being governed by a 
particular constitution will have locus to challenge any infraction upon the provision of 
the constitution. See that case of MUHAMMED SESAN V, LSS JUDICIARY (2019) 1 
LSSCLR. - HON JUDGE ABDULKAREEM ABDULRAZAQ KETU CJLSS  
4. PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE  - ON WHETHER OR NOT TH E COURT CAN 
GRANT PRAYERS NOT SOUGHT FOR : It is trite law that parties in any litigation 
must pray for a particular relief(s) before the court because court is not a Father 
Christmas who dish out gift and presentation to any person unsolicited. Our system  of 
adjudication forestalls court to grant reliefs or prayers that are not specifically sought for 
because it will be tantamount to court descending into the arena of conflict and the face 
of the court will be dent and dusted. See the case of AJEWOLE SAMUE L V. 

3 | P a g e  
 
SPEAKER LSS HOUSE OF REPS (2019) 1 LSSCLR . The implication of the law is 
that there should be prayer accompanying any claim before the court, how the prayer is 
couched or location of the prayer is not necessary provided what the party seeks for is 
discernible. AJEWOLE SAMUEL V. SPEAKER LSS HOUSE OF REPS (supra). - 
HON JUDGE ABDULKAREEM ABDULRAZAQ KETU CJLSS 
5. PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE  - ON WHETHER OR NOT IMPROPER 
CONSTITUTION OF PARTIES CAN AFFECT THE JURISDICTION OF THE 
COURT: ONIBUDO V. ABDULLAH (1991) 2 NWLR [17 2] 230 and CRSN CORP 
V. ONI (1995) 12 NWLR [1225]  held that the issue of improper constitution of parties 
before the court will not affect the jurisdiction of the court provided there is a competent 
claimant and competent defendant to proceed with the case . See also the case of 
SURVEYOR EKERETE ETUKUDO & ANOR V. SURVEYOR AKPAN 
CA/C/162/2008. - HON JUDGE ABDULKAREEM ABDULRAZAQ KETU CJLSS  
6. RULES OF COURT - WHETHER OR N OT COURT RULES SHOULD BE 
OBEYED:  Court rules are meant to be obeyed except there is reasona ble ground to shift 
the ground.  See OBA ILUFEMILOYE AESOLA & ANOR V. OBA OLUDELE 
FALADE-FATILA & ORS (CA/AK/67/2011). - HON JUDGE ABDULKAREEM 
ABDULRAZAQ KETU CJLSS 
7. WORDS AND PHRASES  - DEFINITION OF CAUSE OF ACTION : In the case of 
DASUKI AHMAD & ANOR V. HUMAN RIGHT CHAMBERS & 3 ORS (2019) 1 
LSSCLR 1 , cause of action is defined as facts or set of facts that warrant a party to 
approach court in order to seek legal remedy or reliefs. - HON JUDGE 
ABDULKAREEM ABDULRAZAQ KETU CJLSS  
8. WORDS AND PHRASES  - DEFINITION OF NECESSARY PARTIES : It is trite 
law that necessary party is one whose presence is so significant in determining a case, it 
is person without whom any claim or remedy can be granted without any form of 
injustice. See AWONIYI V. AMORC (2006) SCNJ. - HON JUDGE 
ABDULKAREEM ABDULRAZAQ KETU CJLSS  
 
 
LEAD JUDGEMENT OF HON JUDGE ABDULKAREEM ABDURRAZZAQ KETU; 
CJLSS 
This case was given birth to by an originating summon brought pursuant to order 2 rule of Law 
student Society court rules. In support of originating s ummon is ten paragraphs affidavit and 

4 | P a g e  
 
written address. The fact of the case can be compressed as thus the claimant who is member of 
human right chamber challenged the appointment of one Omopupa as the Attorney General of 
the chambers with the believe that Attorney General cannot be appointed but elected by the 
general congress. He also claims that he was qualified to contest for the post but such appoint has 
deprived him of the right to be voted for. He approached this court for redress particularly to 
question the power of Lord Activist to appoint Attorney General. Claimant couched two issues 
for just determination of this honourable court; 
Whether or not the Lord activist of Human Right chambers has the power to appoint Attorney 
General of the chambers und er section 9(5)8 and other relevant provision of the constitution of 
Human right chambers. 
Whether or not the ultra vires act of the Lord Activist amount to breach of constitutional 
provision. 
Claimant contended on the issue one that Lord activist lacked a ny power to appoint Attorney 
general. He further contended that the usage of appointment by the provision that establishes 
Attorney General Office connotes because it connotes election in other provisions that establish 
other offices. Art. 9 of Human Right s Chambers‟ constitution was cited. He also contended that 
the appointment is ultra vires the Lord Activist and same is null and void. The case of 
OLANIYAN & ORS V. UNIVERSITY OF LAGOS &ORS  (1985) NWLR [9] 599 among other 
was cited. He submitted that appo intment is invalid, null and void and he urged the court to so 
hold.  On the issue two, claimant contended that Lord activist‟s act is breach of constitution, the 
case of FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA V. DARIYE (2011) 13 NWLR [1265] 521 was 
relied upon. He submitted and prayed the court to hold so. 
Claimant prayed for the following reliefs; 
A DECLARATION OF THIS COURT  that Lord Activist lacks power to appoint the Attorney 
General of the chambers under art. 9(5)8 and other relevant provision of the constitutio n of the 
chambers. 
A DECLARATION OF THIS COURT  that the purported appointment made by Lord Activist 
is void and invalid. 
A DECLARATION OF THIS COURT  that 1st and 2nd defendants have flagrantly violated the 
provision of the Human Rights Chambers constitution that they swore to uphold at all times. 

5 | P a g e  
 
A DECLARATION OF THIS COURT  that 1st and 2nd defendants cannot exercise any power 
that has not been conferred upon him by the Human rights Chambers constitution 2018. 
AN ORDER OF THIS COURT  mandating the defendants to perform their duty by organizing 
an election into the office of the attorney General within a specific time 
AN ORDER OF THIS COURT  mandating the defendants to write an apology letter to all 
members of the chambers an paste same all notice boards in the  Faculty for their failure to 
comply with provisions of the constitutional duty. 
AN ORDER OF THIS COURT  mandating the defendants to pay the sum Five Hundred Naira 
each to the claimant as the cost the litigation. 
AND FOR SUCH OTHER ORDERS AND DECLARATIONS  THIS COURT SHALL 
DEEM FIT ON THE CIRCUMSTANCE OF THIS CASE.  
Defendant‟s counsel file preliminary Objection to claimant‟s originating summon but objection 
was raised against such PO that ground of objection was not stated in the PO and that the PO did 
not state the relief(s) that the applicant want from court. Parties were given fair hearing to 
address the court on such objection to PO and the court gave its ruling while couching two 
issues; 
Whether or not prayer should be stated on a portion of court process? 
Whether or not ground of objection should be contained in preliminary objection? 
On the first issue! It is trite law that parties in any litigation must pray for a particular relief(s) 
before the court because court is not a Father Christmas who dish out gift and presentation to any 
person unsolicited. Our system of adjudication forestalls court to grant reliefs or prayers that are 
not specifically sought for because it will be tantamount to court descending into the arena of 
conflict and the face of t he court will be dent and dusted. See the case of AJEWOLE SAMUEL 
V. SPEAKER LSS HOUSE OF REPS (2019) 1 LSSCLR. The implication of the law is that there 
should be prayer accompanying any claim before the court, how the prayer is couched or 
location of the p rayer is not necessary provided what the party seeks for is discernible. 
AJEWOLE SAMUEL V. SPEAKER LSS HOUSE OF REPS (supra). However, this should not 
be done to contravene court rules that provide for location of prayer in any court processes. It is 
advisable to always clearly indicate one‟s prayer so as to avoid unnecessary objection and 
hindrance to the substance of the case. 

6 | P a g e  
 
A careful perusal of the Defendants‟ preliminary objection shows that defendants seek for 
striking out of the claimant‟s originati on processes after every submission on each issue.  
Practically, preliminary objection is mostly used to either temporarily or permanently end 
proceeding in limine. The court holds that PO contained prayers or reliefs that the applicant seeks 
before the co urt. This is settled in favour of the defendants that there is prayer in their 
preliminary objection.  
On the second issue, the ground of objection is the foundation upon which other things in 
preliminary objection rely on. It is so pivotal that issues for  determination must degenerate from 
the ground of objection. As the foundation is to long -lasting building so is ground of objection 
for preliminary objection. It is the mechanism that justifies and sustains the existence of 
preliminary objection. In the c ase of STANDARD CHARTERED BANK NIGERIA LIMITED 
V. DANJUMA AMEH (CA/A/277/M2013) court defines „ground‟ while referring to Black law 
Dictionary that;  
“the word ground is interpreted inter alia as „1. To provide a basis for (something, 
such as a legal claim  or argument)… 2. To base (something, such as legal 
principle or judicial decision) on…”. 
 Impliedly, the absence of ground of objection means the preliminary objection lacks basis.  
Since,  a house cannot be built on the surface of the air same way prelim inary objection without 
ground of objection cannot stand in our court, the reason being that ex nihilo nihil fit, see UAC V. 
Macfor (1961) WRN 1405. Also, LSS Court rules has stated the format and the manner of 
preliminary objection, anything devoid of tha t will not be accommodated because court rules are 
meant to be obeyed except there is reasonable ground to shift the ground.  See OBA 
ILUFEMILOYE AESOLA & ANOR V. OBA OLUDELE FALADE -FATILA & ORS 
(CA/AK/67/2011). This honourable court hereby holds that any PO that does not state ground of 
objection is defective and shall not be allow to stand. This issue is settled in favour of claimant. 
In that regard the PO is struck for not indicating the ground of objection and for non -compliance 
with court rules. 
Defendant‟s counsel refiled the PO that was based on following grounds; 
That the claimant in this case lacks reasonable cause of action 
That the claimant lacks locus standi  

7 | P a g e  
 
That this Honourable court lack Jurisdiction to entertain this suit 
That the necessary party has not been fulfilled. 
That the originating summon has failed to comply with the court rules. 
Three issues were couched from the above grounds of objection, the first issue was whether or 
not this honourable has jurisdiction? This was argued in two s tand point that the claimant did not 
have reasonable cause of action. He contended that claimant lacked cause of action while relying 
on the case of DADA v. SIKUADE (2014) NWLR [1435] 72 @ 82 inter alia. He contended on 
the second stand point that claimant  did not have locus standi to maintain this case, reliance was 
based OMINI V. FRN (2018) LPELR -44195 inter alia. He therefore submitted that claimant 
lacked caused of action and locus standi, it eventually deprived court the jurisdiction to entertain 
the case. On the issue two that whether or not necessary parties requirement has been fulfilled? 
Defendant‟s counsel argued that Attorney General is necessary who ought to have been joined as 
party and non-joinder amount to improper institution of the case. PEENOK INVESTMENT LTD 
V. HOTEL PRESIDENTIAL (1982) 12 SC 1, SIFAX NIGERIA LTD & ORS V. MIGFO 
NIGERIA LIMITED & ANOR (2015) AELR 6513 CA inter alia. He submitted that Attorney 
General is necessary party and urged the court to so hold. On the third issue on whe ther or not 
originating summons of the claimant has failed to comply with the court rules. He contended and 
submitted that the originating summons did not complied with the court rules. He urged the court 
to so hold. In his reply to PO, defendant‟s issues were adopted. On issue one, claimant contended 
that cause of action was determined by looking into the affidavit of the claimant. Reference was 
made to paragraph 6 and 7 of the claimant affidavit and contended that claimant had reasonable 
cause of action. The case of DADA V. SIKUADE (supra) was cited. On the second issue, 
counsel to claimant contended that claimant had suffered damage or injury by virtue of 
paragraph 6 and 7 of claimant affidavit that the appointment had deprived him of his right to be 
voted for. He cited section 7(3) of LSS constitution which confer right to seek remedy on the 
every member of LSS. On the third issue, he contended and submitted that non -joinder of 
necessary party does not affect the jurisdiction of the court, he cited the ca se of OKOYE v. 
NIGERIA CONSTRUCTION  AND FURNITURE LTD & ORS (1991) 7 SC 111. On the issue 
of non -compliance with court rule, he contended and submitted that such was too minimal to 
deprive court of its jurisdiction or terminate the proceeding. He prayed t hat such should be 

8 | P a g e  
 
treated as irregularity and urged the court to so hold. While giving reply on point of law, 
defendant‟s counsel made legal clarification on the disparity between the fair hearing and locus 
standi. The case of WING COMMANDER YUSUF GARBA M SHELIA V. NIGERIA AIR 
FORCE & ANOR (2014) AELR was cited. 
 
Having meritoriously listened to both parties on preliminary objection, this honourable court 
proceeds to give its ruling. For ease determination; these following issues have been couched; 
Whether or not claimant has locus standi? 
Whether or not claimant has reasonable cause of action? 
Whether or not Attorney General is a necessary party? 
Whether or not non-compliance with court rules can affect the jurisdiction the court? 
On the first issue which bothers locus standi, it is an aged principle of law that locus standi 
devolves upon a person that has sustained special or pecuniary damage far and above any other 
person in the society. However, in a constitution matter, any person who is able to prove t hat he 
is being governed by a particular constitution will have locus to challenge any infraction upon 
the provision of the constitution. See that case of MUHAMMED SESAN V, LSS JUDICIARY 
(2019) 1 LSSCLR. Claimant‟s affidavit reveals that claimant is member  of the Human Rights 
Chambers and who is subject to Human Rights Chambers constitution. On that basis, this 
Honourable Court hereby hold that claimant who is member of Human Rights chambers in all 
ramifications has locus standi to institute this case. 
On the second issues that bothers on cause of action, in the case of DASUKI AHMAD & ANOR 
V. HUMAN RIGHT CHAMBERS & 3 ORS (2019) 1 LSSCLR 1, cause of action is defined as 
facts or set of facts that warrant a party to approach court in order to seek legal remedy  or reliefs. 
To determine whether a party has court action, the claimant originating process is considered 
particularly the claimant‟s Affidavit. See also the case of EGBE v. ADEFARASIN (1987) 1 
NWLR (47) 1 @ 20.  
A careful perusal of claimant‟s affidavit particularly paragraphs 6 and 7, it shows that claimant 
who is subject to Human Rights Chambers‟ constitution believes that he has right to be voted for 
or engages in an election to be voted for as Attorney general of the Human Rights Chamber but 
Lord Activist deprives him of such right by appointing one Omopupa. Claimant believes this is 

9 | P a g e  
 
an infringement on his right. The above set of facts is enough to approach court for redress based 
on the belief that his right has been breach by Lord Activist‟s action. The argument that none of 
facts deposed to in the affidavit is factual for remedial relief sound new and strange to this court, 
this is due to the fact that facial examination of the affidavit reveals the opposite.  In that regard, 
this Honourable Court hereby holds that the above set of fact is enough to confer cause of action 
on the claimant. 
On the third issue on necessary party, defendant‟s counsel contended that Attorney General is 
necessary party in this case relying on the case of BABYEJU V. ASHUMU ( 1998) 9 NWLR 
[567] 546 among others. Claimant‟s counsel that non -joinder of necessary party will not affect 
the jurisdiction of the court.  Reliance is based on OKOYE V. NIGERIA CONSTRUCTION 
(1991) 7 SC 36 @ 56 among other.  
It is trite law that necessary party is one whose presence is so significant in determining a case, it 
is person without whom any claim or remedy can be granted without any form of injustice. See 
AWONIYI V. AMORC (2006) SCNJ. Can we say attorney general is necessary party in this 
case o r can we say this case cannot continue due to absence of Attorney General. A careful 
perusal of claimant originating process of the claimant shows that claimant is challenging power 
of the Lord Activist to appoint person to the office of Attorney General, none of the claim or 
relief cannot be granted without the presence of the Attorney General. Assuming without 
conceding that Attorney General is necessary Party, court in the cases of ONIBUDO V. 
ABDULLAH (1991) 2 NWLR [172] 230 and CRSN CORP V. ONI (1995) 1 2 NWLR [1225] 
held that the issue of improper constitution of parties before the court will not affect the 
jurisdiction of the court provided there is a competent claimant and competent defendant to 
proceed with the case. See also the case of SURVEYOR EKER ETE ETUKUDO & ANOR V. 
SURVEYOR AKPAN CA/C/162/2008. In that wise, the presence of Lord Activist and Human 
Right Chamber including the competent claimant show that there is competent parties in this 
case. 
On the fourth issue of non -compliance, defendant con tended that the heading of claimant‟s 
originating summon contravened that LSS Court Rule and claimant replied that such non -
compliance is minimal and should be treated as irregularity.  

10 | P a g e  
 
By the order 3 rule 1(2) of LSS court rules, any act of non -compliance that will not affect the 
substantive proceeding or occasion any injustice will be treated as irregularity and such will not 
nullify the proceeding or affect the jurisdiction of the court. This issue and all other issues are 
settled in favour of the claimant and against the defendant. The PO is hereby dismissed. 
 
Upon the dismissal of defendants‟ PO, defendant filed his statement of defence wherein the 
issues in claimant‟s originating process were adopted. On the first issue, defendant contended 
that when the wordings of the statute are clear, its natural and literal meaning should be ascribed 
to it. Reference was made to art. 9 of the constitution, VICTOR MANYO NDOMA -EGBA 
V.NNMAMEKE CHIKWUELUO & ORS (2004) LPELR-SC. 106/1998 inter alia. He submitted 
that literal rule should be used to interpret the provision in contention and urged the court to so 
hold. On the second issues, claimant contended and submitted that the act of Lord Activist on the 
appointment of Attorney General was valid and constitutional. He  urged the court to so hold. 
These following reliefs were prayed for; 
A DECLARATION OF THIS COURT  that the act of the Lord Activist appointing the 
Attorney General is constitutional. 
A DECLARATION OF THIS COURT  that the act of the Lord Activist appointing the 
Attorney General is in good faith. 
A DECLARATION OF THIS COURT  that the act of the Lord Activist oh Human Rights 
Chambers has the power to appoint the Attorney General of the chambers under art. 9(5)8 and 
other relevant provision of the constitution of the Human Rights chambers. 
A DECLARATION OF THIS COURT that the suit f the claimant is vexatious. 
A DECLARATION OF THIS COURT  that the Attorney General of Human Rights Chambers 
has been appointed validly. 
AN ORDER OF THIS COURT mandating and compelling th e claimant in this case o pay a 
sum of N2000 to the Defendants as cost of litigation. 
AND FOR SUCH OTHER ORDERS AND DECLARATIONS  THIS COURT SHALL 
DEEM FIT IN THE CIRCUMSTANCE OF THIS CASE.  

11 | P a g e  
 
In their reply on point of law, claimant stated that literal rule should not be used in this case 
because same will lead to absurdity, he then urged the court to adopt golden rule of interpretation. 
The case of IHUNWO V. IHUNWO (2013) 8 NWLR [1357] 550 inter alia. 
 
Having analysed the position of both parties, I proceed to make the following legal position. 
For proper and logical discussion, an issue has been couched for ease determination of the case, 
the issue is; 
 
WHETHER ATTORNEY GENERAL SHOULD BE ELECTED OR APPOINTED? 
The claimant counsel in their originating processes argued while citing sec. 9 (5)8 of human right 
chambers‟ constitution (the constitution) that the position of AG should be an elective post rather 
that appointive post. Claimant argued that any authority created by statute cannot do anything 
beyond what the law says it can do, the case of OLANIYAN & ORS V. UNILAG  (supra) was 
cited. However, defendant contended that the literal rule of interpretation should be deployed to 
construe the provision in question. The case of VICTOR MANYO NDOMA -EGBA v. 
NNAMEKE CHIKWUELUO CHUKWUOGOR & ORS (2004) LPELR -SC among other 
was cited.  
It is trite principle of law and rule of grammar that each word will have its operation meaning 
within the context of their usage, see that case of DAGBO V. FIN. SEC. HUMAN RIGHTS 
CHAMBERS (2019) 1 LSSCLR, AJEWOLE SAMUEL V. SPEAKER, LSS HOUSE OF 
REPS & ANOR (2019) 1 LSSCLR.  In the same line, statutes are not to be interpreted in 
isolation but holistic and all encompassing construction should be deployed to reveal the 
intention of the law dr after. See that case of DASUKI & ANOR V. HUMAN RIGHT 
CHAMBERS & 3 ORS. (2019) 1 LSSCLR, SESAN V. JUDICIARY, LSS (2019) 1 LSSCLR.  
In this instance case, the holistic reading of the constitution reveals that many offices are 
established by the constitution. The constitution requires that some office should be elective and 
some should be appointive, See art. 8 and art. 9 of the constitution . The provision of the 
constitution that establishes the Attorney General Office does not expressly state any further 
provision which indicates that election should be conducted for the office. It is then ideal on 
point of law and reasonable human thinking to conceive that Attorney General Office can only 
be occupied by the person who is constitutionally qualified and legally  appointed. The word 

12 | P a g e  
 
“appoint or appointment” does not mean “elect or election”. Even in the dictionary, they are not 
synonymous. And appointment cannot be used for election in ordinary day to day conversation. 
It is hereby held that Attorney general office is appointive office. 
At this juncture, what will be lingering in reasonable person‟s mind is who has the power to 
appoint? The constitution does not expressly state who can appoint, this is due to the inelegant 
drafting of the constitution. Nevertheless , art. 9(1) of the constitution  makes the Lord Activist 
the head of the Executive Council. Also, art. 9(4)  gives Lord Activist power to delegate 
authority to any member or committee and art. 9(9)  gives Lord activist power to do other 
necessary thing for the smooth running of the chamber. The provision implies that where there is 
no Attorney General and there is duty which relates to that office, it will be incumbent upon the 
Lord Activist to ensure that such duty is carried out either by himself as the head  of the 
Executive Council or by anybody who can do such duty. For the smooth running of the chamber, 
power of delegation of Lord Activist can be extend to power to appoint any qualifies person as 
Attorney General. It is then saves to state that the constit ution that creates the office of Lord 
Activist gives its power to appoint Attorney General for the smooth running of the chambers and 
thus, Lord Activist has not acted ultra vires. See the case of OLANIYAN & ORS V. UNILAG 
(SUPRA). Even, the natural belief of an objective person in this instance case will be that in the 
absence of provision in the constitution that stipulates who can appoint, Lord Activist should 
have the power to appoint any qualified person except Lord Activist wants to undertake the 
obligation as the Head of Chambers and of Executive council. 
It is trite rule of interpretation that where the provision of the law is clear and unambiguous, its 
natural, simple and dictionary meaning should be deployed and court should not conduct any 
empirical scrutiny to import new meaning which will travel against the intention of the drafter of 
law. See the cases of DASUKI’S CASE (SUPRA), SAMUEL V SPEAKER LSS HOUSE OF 
REP (2019) 1 LSSCLR, DAGBO V. FIN. SEC. HUMAN RIGHT CHMABERS (2019) 1 
LSSCLR, TAOFIQ WALIU  V. CLERK, LSS HOUSE OF REPS (2019) 1 LSSCLR . The 
contentions of claimant that appointment in that provision connotes election and golden rule of 
interpretation should be used are too sugary for this court cannot swallow such for it is inimical 
to our judi cial health and same is spat out. Appointment is appointment and appoint is appoint 
while voting is voting and vote is vote, the meaning will only intertwine when the contextual 

13 | P a g e  
 
usage demands such. In this case, there is not warrant circumstance that requi res changing of the 
meaning. 
The case is therefore resolved that; 
Attorney General office is an appointive office. 
Lord activist has power to appoint any qualified person to that office. 
The appointment made in this instance case is valid and constitutional. 
Lord activist has acted beyond his power in respect of such appointment. 
The case is settled in favour of the defendant and against the claimant. 
All declarations and orders seeks by the defendant are granted except prayer 6. All other 
declarations and orders not granted are deemed rejected. 
OPINION OF HON. JUDGE SALAM ABDULSALAM OPEYEMI JLSS 
I have the prerogative to read in draft the just delivered judgement by my learned brother, 
ABDULKAREEM ABDULRAZAQ CJLSS,  I have no doubt in his reasoning and concl usion, 
more so that his view is living large in the true position of the law. However, I must remember to 
contribute more wisdom to this careful judgement. 
On the 21 st day of November, 2019, an improperly headed originating summons, was 
purportedly brought pursuant to Order 2 Rule 2 of the Law Students’ Society Court (Civil 
Procedure) Rules, 2019, supported by an affidavit of 9 paragraphs and a written address and 
same was adopted before this honourable court. On the 5 th day of December, 2019, the 
defendants filed and adopted their defence. The claimant‟s counsel was given ample opportunity 
to reply to the defence on point of law.  
Earlier in this case, this court enters a ruling striking out the defendant‟s preliminary objection 
which does not comply with our court rules. I must state my online submission that, the rules of 
court is not a paper tiger law; it is enough that it ensures the speed and order of proceedings in 
court. Prudent practice is, counsel must not only abide by it but must jealously refuse to by-pass 
its provisions with diligence. In MAKOV. UMOH (2010) 8 NWLR (PT. 1195) @ 82, the court 
held that  
“Rules of court are meant to be obeyed by parties as they are guidelines to the courts, 
litigants and counsel. They are not mere rules but are held  to be in the nature of 

14 | P a g e  
 
subsidiary legislation having regard to the provisions of Section 18 (1) of the 
Interpretation Act and therefore have the force of Law”. 
Also, the court expects that counsel should be as meticulous as they can while drafting their 
processes and must be faithfully diligent in representing the interests of their client. See EIB 
BUILDING SOCIETYLTD V. ADEBAYO (2004) ALL FWLR (PT. 193) 228 @ 366. If the 
court could be magnanimous enough to specify the rules for filing a preliminary objection, which 
may not be understood by the clients, it is not more than an affront for a counsel to simple -
simply borrow from an alien rule in filing same. Even though, such alien rule may be as elegant 
but may prejudice the interest of order. 
Also, parties must be warned not to tame any non -compliance with the rules of court as mere 
frivolity. The right is elegantly an exclusive right of the court to decide on any pending and 
impending case before it. However, what must be paramount to all courts is the admi nistration of 
substantial justice rather than undue adherence to technicalities. I rely on the case of UKIRI V. 
GECO-PRACKLA (NIG) LTD (2010) ALL FWLR (PT. 534) 53.  Thus, in every cases of 
non-compliance it is for the court to examine it and decide in the cause of justice which way to 
go. 
Now, I have couched just one issue for just determination: 
“Whether or not the appointment by the Lord Activist is ultra vires” 
Carefully, I have the prerogative to peruse the Constitution of the Human Rights Chamber. 
Having successfully construed in isolation and also conjunctively, the provision of Article 9 (5) 
8 in line with the spirit of the Constitution, I have no option as legally perfect than to hold that 
the appointment made by the Lord Activist is not only valid b ut valid according to the 
Constitution. Article 9 (5) 8 provides that; 
“Provided that only a member of the Chamber who is a Students‟ Union Advocate 
with versed experience  and integrity with a minimum number of five court 
appearances and must have lead at least one of the said cases, be appointed as 
Attorney-General”( italic and emphasize mine) 
The gravamen of the defendant‟s grievance should no longer be raised against the clear provision 
of the constitution. That is, if the constitution employs the word “ appointed”, it is not even 
within my competence to say otherwise. God forbid the era when a counsel will ever pray that 

15 | P a g e  
 
this honourable court should interpret appointed to mean elected, I must be very sorry, the courts 
are not magicians and must not be swayed with the sense of voodoo. See the case of AWUSE V. 
ODILI (2005) 16 NWLR (PT. 952) PAGE 416 
A quick look at the dictionary meaning of „appointed' shows that it means to assign, 
designate, or set apart by authority- English Dictionary 
Now, the real question is whether the Lord Activist acted ultra vires the constitution by assuming 
the power to appoint the Attorney General of the Chamber under Article 9 (5) 8 of the 
Chamber‟s Constitution. I must say that the Chamber‟s Constitution was not elegantly draft ed, 
thus, creating bumps that can dash the hope of those who are interested in the matters of the 
chamber. Flowing from Article 9 (1) 1, 4, 7 and 9 and the spirit of the Constitution, the Lord 
Activist has been showered with plenitude powers ranging from t he power to regulate and 
develop the chambers in its activities. In my view, the power to appoint may not stand an express 
mention but by necessary implication, the Attorney has a duty to improve and develop the 
advocacy prowess of members of the chamber, therefore, if the Lord Activist hesitate his 
appointment, I doubt if he has not by -passed his constitutional duties under Article 9 (1) 1, 4, 7 
and 9. 
It is trite and well settled law that where the wordings of the law are crystal than clear, its 
original and natural meaning are to be given to it, in interpretation. I rely on NYAKO V. 
ADAMAWA STATE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY & ORS (2016) LPELR -41822(SC) and 
SALAM ABDULSALAM V. THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL, LAW STUDENTS’ 
SOCIETY AND ANOR SUIT NO: SUJ/001/18 -19. Thus, in con struing the provision of a 
statute, where the wordings are clear and unambiguous, it is the words used that prevail and not 
what the judge says the provision mean. In fact, no court is entitled to substitute its words for the 
words of the statute. See AWUSE V. ODILI (supra) 
Although, the claimant averred in his paragraph 6 of the affidavit in support of the originating 
summons that he is qualified to be elected as the Attorney General of the Chamber, however, the 
setentialegis was activated when constitution used the word “appointed”. I am in no doubt that, 
doing otherwise would lead to acting against the spirit of the constitution  and instead the court 
will be reluctant to declare any election of the Attorney General as ultra vires. 

16 | P a g e  
 
I hereby reso lve this issue in favour of the defendants, and I grants all prayers sought by the 
defendants excluding prayer six. 
 
OPINION OF HON. JUDGE JAMIU RIDWAN ADENIYI, JLSS  
I have had the privilege to read in draft the judgment just delivered by my learned Broth er Hon. 
Judge A. A. Ketu, CJLSS and I agree with his reasoning and conclusion. 
Nevertheless, I consider it pivotal to reiterate that It is a notorious trite principle of our law that a 
Court does not embark on a voyage of discovery or borrow the glasses of  Albert Einstein into 
interpret the construction of the constitution when its provisions are precise, clear, free from 
doubt and unambiguous. This is stated in the dicta of per Akitan, JSC. In ATTORNEY 
GENERAL OF THEFEDERATION V.ABUBAKAR [2007] 20 WRN 1 AT 49-50 that 
“the general accepted rule of construction is that it is to be assumed that the words and 
phrases of technical legislation are used in the technical meaning if they have acquire 
done, and otherwise in their ordinary meaning. Phrases and sentenc es are to be 
construed according to their rule of grammar. If there is nothing to modify, alter or 
qualify the language which the statute contains, it must be construed in the ordinary and 
natural meaning the words and sentences. This is regarded as „liter al interpretation‟ or 
characterized as the „positivist approach‟‟. 
Also see UKEAGBU V. ATTORNEY GENERAL IMO STATE[1983]1SCNLR212 . By 
Paragraph six the claimant's affidavit, he states that he is qualified to be elected Attorney General 
of the Chamber. He al so contends in his brief of argument that the phrase “be appointed as the 
Attorney-General” used in Article 9{5}8 of the Constitution of Human Rights Chambers be 
construed to mean that the Attorney-General should be voted for by the members of the congress . 
The word „appointed‟ according to Merriam-Webster Dictionary is defined as  
“to choose (someone) to have a particular job: to give someone a position or 
duty”.„Voted‟ by the same dictionary means “ the official choice that you make in an 
election, meeting, etc., by casting a ballot, raising your hand, speaking y our choice 
aloud, etc”  
That argument of the plaintiff is a new one to me. I do not consider it a good argument. It does 
not represent the true position of the law. Interpreting the word app ointed as voted or voted as 

17 | P a g e  
 
appointed will produce only one result, what is the result? It will amount to a misdirection which 
is tantamount to stabbing the heart of the drafter of the law and damaging his intention. May God 
forbid that day. A court must not give to a word or phrase of a construction an alien meaning that 
the drafter does not in tend. See TORIOLA V. WILLIAMS [1982] 7 SC  27 . I think I have to 
stop here. I do not want to dwell so much on the issues. My learned Brother, A. A. Ketu, has 
dealt with them admirably. It is for the above reasons and the more detailed reasons given by my 
learned Brother, A. A. Ketu, CJLSS that I hold that this case is settled in favour of the defendants 
 
APPEARANCES 
J. O. BAYESHIA (lead Counsel), M. I. Sesan,  W. O. Taofiq, A. P. Ganiyu, J. A. Amos, M. A. 
Ali, L. O. Okwara, AkanniKamaldeen for claimant  
M. A. Omopupa (lead Counsel), H. K. Eleja, Oajideoladimeji, M. K. Yahya, J. O. Oyebode, I. O. 
Kolawole, I. S. Ibrahim and P. E. Ogungbe for Defendants 
Amicus  
TajudeenHabeebullah SAU, A. A. Mustapha SAU, Isiaka Azeez, A. A. Akintola, Q. A. 
Adedimeji, M. O. Ridwan. 
 