1 | P a g e  
 
AKANNI & 2 ORS v THE WELFARE DIRECTOR LSS AND 2 
ORS 
CITATION: (2021) LCELR 2021002 
In the Law Students’ Society Court Of Unilorin 
ON THURSDAY, 1ST DAY OF APRIL, 2021 
Suit No: LSSJ/011/2020 
Before Their Lordships: 
Hon. Judge Muhammed Shuaib Oladimeji – Chief Judge, LSS Court of Unilorin 
Hon. Judge Tunji-Lawal Lawal Bolaji - Judge, LSS Court of Unilorin 
Hon. Judge Jamiu Ridwan Adeniyi - Judge, LSS Court of Unilorin 
 
BETWEEN 
OKWARA LAWRENCE 
AKANNI KAMALDEEN 
OWOLABI FARUQ 
Claimants 
 
AND 
WELFARE DIRECTOR LAW STUDENTS‟ SOCIETY 
WELFARE COMMITTEE 
ATTORNEY GENERAL LAW STUDENTS‟ SOCIETY 
Defendants 
 
 
 

2 | P a g e  
 
RATIO DECIDENDI 
1. EVIDENCE- WHETHER ADRESS OF COUNSEL CAN CONSTITUTE EVIDENCE 
“The law is however very clear that address of counsel no matter how sumptuous cannot in any sense  
serve as evidence before a court of law. Just as held by this court in OMOPUPA v P.R.O 1, HUMAN 
RIGHTS CHAMBERS (supra) "An address of counsel no matter how brilliantly drafted can neither 
amount to evidence nor a substitute for evidence." Per Muhammad JL. SS (p. 12).It is therefore my 
holding that the facts contained in the respective claimants‟ affidavits remain uncontroverted ” PER 
TUNJI-LAWAL BOLAJI (JLSS) at Pg 4 
2. LSS CONSTITUTIONAL LAW – WHETHER THE LSS CONSTITUTION IS SUPREME 
“When the constitution itself provides in S. 1 (1) that "This Constitution is supreme and its provisions 
shall have a binding force on all organs and members within the Society, and shall not be subject to 
modifications, save in accordance with the provisions hereinafter made" This provision alone proves that 
all provisions contained in the Constitution are binding on all members including all organs within the 
law students‟ society. This position is fortified by the holding of the Supreme court in the case of 
GENERAL SANNI ABACHA AND OTHERS VS CHIEF GANI FAWEHINMI(2000) LPELR- SC. 
45/1997 where the court held that "the constitution of an association is the fonsestorigo and its provisions 
are supreme and binding on all its members and any law inconsistent wit h it shall be declared null and 
void and of no effect” PER TUNJI-LAWAL BOLAJI (JLSS) at Pg. 3-4 
3. WORDS AND PHRASES- SHALL 
“In the wordings of this court in OMOPUPA v P.R.O 1, HUMAN RIGHTS CHAMBERS Per 
Muhammad JLSS: “The word „shall‟ when used in a statutory provision imports anything must be done, 
it is a form of command or mandate” PER TUNJI-LAWAL BOLAJI (JLSS) at Pg. 4 
 
LEAD JUDGEMENT OF HON JUDGE TUNJI -LAWAL LAWAL BOLAJI; JLSS Tunji -LawalBolaji, 
JLSS: 
Like any other suits seeking interpretation of the law, before this court is an Originating summons brought by the 
claimants against the defendants wherein the following reliefs were sought:  
1. A declaration of this honorable court that the 1st and 2nd defendants have no t fulfilled their responsibility 
under the Law Students Society‟s Constitution.  
2. A declaration of this honorable court that the 1st and 2nd defendants are not fulfilling their responsibility under 
the Law Students Society‟s Constitution.  
3. An order of t his honorable court ordering the 1st and 2nd defendants to carry out their duties dutifully with 
respect to their functions and manifesto.  
4. An order of this honorable court ordering the 1st and 2nd defendants to tender an apology letter on the LSS 
notice boards and platform in their capacity to the students of the society.  
5. An order of this honorable court directing the 1st and 2nd defendants to pay a token of 5000 naira to the 
Claimants, cash or cheque as general damages of inconveniences.  

3 | P a g e  
 
6. An order of this honorable court directing the 1st and 2nd defendants to pay a token of 2500 naira to the 
Claimants, cash or cheque as Special damages for the pursuit of this suit.  
7. And for such further order(s) as this honorable court may deem fit to make in the  circumstances of this case. 
The Claimants‟ Originating Summons was supported by 4 affidavits and a sole was couched for the 
determination of the suit which is;  
 Whether or not the 1st and 2nd defendants have fulfilled, are fulfilling the responsibilities s addled on 
their position under the Law Students Society‟s Constitution 2018 (as amended)?  
In his brief of argument, counsel to the Claimants stratified the sole issue into two standpoints;  
I. Whether or not the 1st and 2nd defendants are responsible for the welfare of the members of society?  
II. Whether by considering the facts of this case, the 1st and the 2nd defendants are fulfilling the 
responsibilities saddled on their titled position?  
On the first standpoint, Counsel to the Claimants contended that th e 1st and 2nd defendants are responsible for 
the welfare of members of the society. He cited Section 28 (1) and Section 4 (2) of the LSS Constitution . He 
further argued that where the provision of the law is unambiguous, the court is to apply it as such in  order words. 
He cited AigbojeAig-Imoukhuede v. Dr Patrick Ifeanyiubah&Ors[2014] AELR 5039 (CA).  He prayed that 
the court to so hold. On the second standpoint, learned counsel to the Claimants vehemently contended that 
looking at the flooding facts in this issue, the 1st and 2nd defendants are not fulfilling their constitutional duties 
saddled on their positions. Counsel cited again Section 28(2) of the LSS Constitution  and urged the court to 
interpret the word “shall” contained therein as importing compulsion and not permissiveness. He cited the case of 
Dangana v. Usman [2013] 6 NWLR (pt. 2349) 50 at 80-81; Central Bank of Nigeria v. Okeb Nig. Ltd [2014] 
AELR (CA) and Kamba v. Kamba [2005] 4 NWLR part 914 . He concluded by urging the court to so hold.  In 
the defendants‟ oral defence, learned counsel to the defendants adopted the sole issue couched by the claimants in 
their Originating Summons. Counsel to the defendants argued that contrary to the contention of the claimants, the 
1st and 2nd defendants have fulf illed all their responsibilities to see welfare of members of the Law Students 
Society and all other things incidental to them. He proceeded by saying that the duties in question cannot be 
performed alone by the defendants but in collaboration with some ot her committee and Faculty authority. He 
submitted that since it is not within the power of the defendants alone to perform the duties, the law will not 
command the impossibility. He relied on H.O Adeniyi v. Ifelodun LGA 1/218CCA. He concluded by urging the 
court to dismiss the claimants‟ action. Having perused the briefs of the claimant as well as the oral defence of the 
the defendants, it appears to me that the fire currently burning before this court will be watered down if the sole 
question posed by the c laimants in this suit is answered. I shall be reiterating this question thus: Whether or not 
the 1st and 2nd defendants have fulfilled, are fulfilling the constitutional duties saddled on their position under 
the law student society Law Students‟ Society‟s Constitution 2018 (hereinafter referred to as “the Constitution”)? 
This issue in my considered view has absolved the issue of whether or not the defendants have any duties 
imposed on them under the Constitution. May I even ask whether or not there is any need to even advance 
argument on whether or not the defendants have any duties imposed on them by the constitution ? When the 
constitution itself provides in S. 1 (1)  that "This Constitution is supreme and its provisions shall have a binding 
force on all organs and members within the Society, and shall not be subject to modifications, save in accordance 
with the provisions hereinafter made" This provision alone proves that all provisions contained in the 
Constitution are binding on all members including all organs within the law students‟ society. This position is 
fortified by the holding of the Supreme court in the case of GENERAL SANNI ABACHA AND OTHERS VS 

4 | P a g e  
 
CHIEF GANI FAWEHINMI(2000) LPELR - SC. 45/1997 where the court held that "the constitution of an 
association is the fonsestorigo and its provisions are supreme and binding on all its members and any law 
inconsistent with it shall be declared null and void and of no effect.  "Thus, if the defendants occupy certain 
positions upon which the constitution has made  certain provisions on them in obligatory terms, then, same must 
be complied with. It is therefore my opinion that since the defendants in this case are occupying positions by 
virtue of which certain obligations have been conferred on them then, performing  these obligations are not only 
necessary but also compulsory. What are then the relevant provisions relating to the defendant in this matter? As 
posited by the claimants, S. 28 of the Constitution  particularly subsection 1, 2 & 3 is very important in this  
regard. It reads: (1) The Welfare Director shall be responsible for the welfare of the members of the Society. (2) 
He shall, in conjunction with President, liaise with appropriate authorities such as The Student Affairs, Faculty of 
Law, Works department, etc. to ensure the welfare of members. (3) He shall in liaison with the Faculty authority, 
see to the maintenance of the Society‟s amenities such as the toilets, furniture and all electrical appliances, etc. It 
is my opinion that without any reluctance that the defendants are bound by the above provisions in as much as the 
constitution is binding on them. It follows in addition that these provisions are drafted in obligatory terms as the 
word 'shall' does not cease to appear in all. In the wordings of this court in OMOPUPA v P.R.O 1, HUMAN 
RIGHTS CHAMBERS Per Muhammad JLSS : “The word „shall‟ when used in a statutory provision imports 
anything must be done, it is a form of command or mandate” Premised on the above it is my opinion that the 
defendants are bound by the provisions of S.28 which confers on them the obligation of seeing to the welfares of 
all members of the LAW student society and I so hold. Let me now conveniently attend to the real issue in 
question, that is whether or not the defendants are performing this obligation placed on them by the constitution. I 
am satisfied that this is a matter of fact which can only be proved by evidence. No doubt, the respective claimant 
in this suit have supported their originating summons with their respective affi davits stating the facts evidencing 
their claims. It is however unfortunate that the defendants in this case agreed with the claimants on all facts put 
before this court. Although, A.B Abdulraheem, learned A.G of the Law Student Society and the legal 
representative of the defendants beautifully made some facts known during his oral defence to the claim of the 
claimants. The law is however very clear that address of counsel no matter how sumptuous cannot in any sense 
serve as evidence before a court of law. Just as held by this court in OMOPUPA v P.R.O 1, HUMAN RIGHTS 
CHAMBERS (supra)"An address of counsel no matter how brilliantly drafted can neither amount to evidence 
nor a substitute for evidence." Per Muhammad JL.SS (p. 12).It is therefore my holding that  the facts contained in 
the respective claimants‟ affidavits remain uncontroverted . Thus, it is my finding relying on the uncontroverted 
facts contained in the respective affidavits of the claimants particularly lines 14 - 25 of the second claimants 
affidavit and lines 14 - 22 of the first claimant's affidavit and lines 14 - 16 of the affidavit deposed to by one 
Oladoja Khadijah and lines 14 - 16 of the 3rd claimant's affidavit that the defendants have not and are not 
fulfilling the constitutional duties they are saddled with under the law students society constitution and I so hold. 
Based on my decision above, the following reliefs are hereby granted Order 1,2,3,4 of the claimants prayers are 
hereby granted while all other orders, reliefs, prayers sought in this suit are refused.  
MUHAMMAD SHUAIB, JLSS: I have read in draft the lead judgement just delivered by my learned brother, 
Tunji-LawalBolaji, JLSS, I agree with his reasoning and conclusion.  
JAMIU RIDWAN ADENIYI, JLSS: I read in advance the lead judgement d elivered by my learned brother, 
Tunji-LawalBolaji, JLSS, he did justice to the issue in controversy. I  agree with his reasoning and abide by his 
consequential orders 
NAMES OF COUNSELS 

5 | P a g e  
 
 For the Claimants: Akanni Kamaldeen (Lead Counsel), Okwara Lawrence, A.Y. Adebayo, R. K. Jimoh  
For the Defendants: A.B Abdul Raheem (Attorney General o f the Law Students‟ So ciety) (Lead Counsel), H. T. 
Usman, A. A. Abdul Azeez  
Amicus: A.O Abeeb 