IN THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN
HOLDEN AT UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN SUIT NO: SUC/UIL/JC/OJ/008/24-25 CITATION: (2025) 4 USLR
BEFORE THEIR LORDSHIPS:
HON. JUSTICE ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE (CJSU) (PRESIDING JUSTICE)
HON. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD KAMALDEEN GBEMISOLA (JSU) HON. JUSTICE TOHEEB ABDULSAMOD OBASANJO (JSU)
BETWEEN
AKERELE SUCCESS AYOMIPOSI ...................................CLAIMANT AND
1. SPEAKER, NIGERIAN ASSOCIATION OF AGRICULTURAL STUDENTS (NAAS), UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN
2....STUDENTS' REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL (SRC), NIGERIAN ASSOCIATION OF AGRICULTURAL STUDENTS (NAAS), UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN
3....SENATOR YUSUF SHEU-IBRAHIM
4....OMOJAIYE OLUWADAMILOLA
5....ASUNMOGE IKMOT OLAJUMOKE
6....HON. TOYYEX, CHAIRMAN DISCIPLINARY COMMITTEE...........................................................DEFENDANTS
ACTION: Fundamental Rights - Enforcement of Fundamental Rights ADMINISTRATIVE LAW: JUSTICE – The Meaning of Justice;
COURT: Power and Jurisdiction;
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE: Motion on Notice - Ruling on Motion on Notice LEGAL MAXIM: Ex Nihilo Nihil Fit – The Meaning of Ex Nihilo Nihil Fit ; WORDS AND PHRASES: Suspension – The Meaning Of Suspension;
WORDS AND PHRASES: Bye-Election – The Meaning of Bye-Election; 35
ACTION: Fundamental Rights - Enforcement of Fundamental Rights
The court is indeed a safe haven for one he who have diligently done his own obligation and hell for he who failed to perfect his own obligation as bestowed upon by the law and it is the last resort of a common man. The law, particularly section 46 of the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999, As Amended, states verbatim that: 46. (1) Any person who alleges that any of the provisions of this Chapter has been, is being or likely to be contravened in any State in relation to him may apply to a High Court in that State for redress. PER JSU TOHEEB ABDULSAMOD OBASANJO
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW: JUSTICE – The Meaning of Justice;
This makes the defendants to have failed in upholding the principle of justice. The principle of justice as held in the notorious case of JOSIAH v STATE, “Justice is a tripartite wheel, Justice to the accused person, justice to the defendant and justice to the society whose norm and ethics has been broken.” PER JSU TOHEEB ABDULSAMOD OBASANJO
COURT: Power and Jurisdiction;
After the arguments of the parties by their legal practitioners, the ruling of this honourable court on the preliminary objection was delivered by Honourable Justice Toheeb Abdulsamad Obasanjo, that the right originating process being a writ of summons, was employed since there were allegations and conflicts of facts in the affidavits of the parties in support of their arguments. Also, this court held that, looking at the facts surrounding this case, it can be inferred that the faculty Judiciary is handicapped to fully decide this matter and by Section 15(5)(d) of the Students’ Union Constitution (As Revised in 2024), this honorable court has the power and jurisdiction to hear and determine this matter brought before it. Therefore, the preliminary objection holds no water in law. PER CJSU ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE: Motion on Notice - Ruling on Motion on Notice
After the filing, adoption and adumbration of the motion on notice and the counter motion as well as the supporting affidavit and counter affidavit, this honourable court, while placing reliance in the case of Nwannewuihe v. Nwannewuihe(2007) 16 NWLR (Pt. 1059) 1, refused to give its final ruling on the motion on notice and orders that the substantive suit should commence for the just determination of this matter as giving its final ruling on the motion will amounts to delving into the substantive suit due to the irreconcilable conflict of facts in both affidavits. PER CJSU ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE
LEGAL MAXIM: Ex Nihilo Nihil Fit – The Meaning of Ex Nihilo Nihil Fit ;
The whole spirit and intention of NAAS Constitution is that all elected officer holders
must have been duly sworn in and taken oath of office before the issue of his or her 36

suspension can come into limelight. This is because the office must have been legally occupied before Its holder can be legally removed as it will merely amounts to building something on nothing and expecting it to stand. This is held in the cases of Stanbic IBTC Bank Plc v. L.G.C. Ltd (2020) 2 NWLR (Pt. 1707)1, VAB Petroleum Inc v. Momah (2013) 14 NWLR (Pt.1374) 284 and UAC v MACFOY (1961)All ER 1169 at 1172 where it was held that “one cannot build something on nothing and expect it to stand; it will certainly collapse”.
WORDS AND PHRASES: Suspension – The Meaning of Suspension;
In Yep v. Samuel (2020) 16 NWLR (Pt. 1750) 193, the court held that “the word ‘suspension’ means a temporary privation or deprivation, cessation or stoppage of or from, the privileges and rights of a person. The word carries or conveys a temporary or transient disciplinary procedure which keeps away the victim or person disciplined from his regular occupation or calling either for a fixed or terminal period or indefinitely. The disciplinary procedure gives the initiation of the discipline a period to make up his mind as to what should be done to the person facing the discipline”. Also in A-G., Cross River v. F.R.N (2019) 10 NWLR (Pt. 1681) 401, the word “suspension” was defined to “means the act of temporary deprivation of a person’s power or privileges especially of office or profession”.
WORDS AND PHRASES: Bye-Election – The Meaning of Bye-Election;
By the decision of the Supreme Court in Labour Party v. I.N.E.C (2009) 6 NWLR (Pt. 1137) 315, a bye-election is an election specially held to fill a vacant post. Although, the said bye election was nullified and cancelled as averred by the defendants’ witnesses, there is no way a suspension would have given rise to bye election if it was not meant to be a removal and the right to remove a duly elected office holder lies with the congress after it must have been duly adjudicated upon by the Judicial Council of NAAS and never in the power or authority of the SRC. Students’ Representative Council only has the power to suspend after following the due process and not the power to remove in disguise of suspension that will render an office vacant, warranting a bye-election to be conducted.
LEAD JUDGEMENT OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT ON THE MATTER
DELIVERED BY HONOURABLE JUSTICE ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE, CJSU
This suit commenced vide a writ of summons filed by the Claimant and adopted on
Monday, 7th of April, 2025 before this honourable court. Prior to this process, the Claimant has filed an independent motion exparte which was upheld by this honourable court and this court make orders inter alia that the claimant remains the welfare secretary
2-elect for 12 days counting from Thursday, April 3rd, 2025 when the ruling was delivered pending the hearing of the motion on notice and the final determination of the substantive suit (which is the writ of summons).
   37

After the filing, adoption and adumbration of the motion on notice and the counter motion as well as the supporting affidavit and counter affidavit, this honourable court, while placing reliance in the case of Nwannewuihe v. Nwannewuihe(2007) 16 NWLR (Pt. 1059) 1, refused to give its final ruling on the motion on notice and orders that the substantive suit should commence for the just determination of this matter as giving its final ruling on the motion will amounts to delving into the substantive suit due to the irreconcilable conflict of facts in both affidavits.
On Wednesday, 23rd of April, 2025, a preliminary objection was also brought forward by the defendants that this honorable court lacks the requisite jurisdiction to hear this suit on the ground of non-fulfillment of the condition precedent that this case ought to have filed from Faculty of Agriculture Judicial Council, as well as the ground that the correct originating process was not used. After the arguments of the parties by their legal practitioners, the ruling of this honourable court on the preliminary objection was delivered by Honourable Justice Toheeb Abdulsamad Obasanjo, that the right originating process being a writ of summons, was employed since there were allegations and conflicts of facts in the affidavits of the parties in support of their arguments. Also, this court held that, looking at the facts surrounding this case, it can be inferred that the faculty Judiciary is handicapped to fully decide this matter and by Section 15(5)(d) of the Students’ Union Constitution (As Revised in 2024), this honorable court has the power and jurisdiction to hear and determine this matter brought before it. Therefore, the preliminary objection holds no water in law.
The case was adjourned till the next day being a Thursday, 24th of April, 2025 for the opening of the case of the Claimant to be followed by that of the defendants for the purpose of expedient judicial proceeding and to avoid being caught in the statute-barred provision of Section 15(2)(b) of the Students’ Union Constitution (Revised in 2024). All the counsel to the defendants failed to appear before this honourable court that day without any prior notice and a punitive order was granted upon the application of the Claimant’s Counsel against the defendants for them to pay the sum of Two Thousand and Five Hundred and Ninety-five Naira only (#2,595.00) to be paid on or before the next adjourned date alongside with a written application stating convincing facts behind the absence of the counsel in the court that day. The orders were complied with by the concerned party.
On Tuesday, 29th of April, 2025, the trial commenced with the Claimant opening her case through examination in chief and was cross-examined by the opposing counsel with re- examination by her counsel and thereafter the case of the claimant was closed. A petition of
the 5th Defendant was the only admissible document tendered through the Claimant Witness marked as Exhibit A. The same procedure was followed by the defendants’ counsel in the opening of their case by calling upon their witnesses for examination in chief, cross examination and re-examination where necessary. The defendants also closed their case that same day. Both parties filed their final written addresses and the case was
adjourned till Tuesday, 6th April, 2025 for delivery of judgement.
A careful perusal of the final written addresses of the parties duly filed and adopted before 38

this court today and in the totality of the evidence adduced, this honorable court deem it fit and proper that a sole issue should be couched for the just determination of this matter;
WHETHER OR NOT THE CLAIMANT WAS DULY SUSPENDED UNDER THE LAW?
In Yep v. Samuel (2020) 16 NWLR (Pt. 1750) 193, the court held that “the word ‘suspension’ means a temporary privation or deprivation, cessation or stoppage of or from, the privileges and rights of a person. The word carries or conveys a temporary or transient disciplinary procedure which keeps away the victim or person disciplined from his regular occupation or calling either for a fixed or terminal period or indefinitely. The disciplinary procedure gives the initiation of the discipline a period to make up his mind as to what should be done to the person facing the discipline”. Also in A-G., Cross River v. F.R.N (2019) 10 NWLR (Pt. 1681) 401, the word “suspension” was defined to “means the act of temporary deprivation of a person’s power or privileges especially of office or profession”.
From the above Judicial definitions, it is clear that suspension arises after a person must have been in a position or occupation and thereafter, he or she is temporarily deprived of the benefits and rights there from pending the final determination of the issue or issues surrounding the suspension.
Even before an office holder could be suspended through petition, by Article 20, Rule 12 of the NAAS Constitution, the following has been laid down;
A. The House shall have the power to receive petition(s) from officer(s) or member(s) of the association.
B. A petition may be presented to the House by any officer or member of the association or through a honorable who shall stand in place of the petitioner provided that a petitioner, where he/she is presenting his/her petition himself or herself, shall come to the floor of the house to do the presentation.
C. No petition shall be presented to the House unless it is in
accordance With the following rules:
i. Every petition must be properly addressed to the house, respectful, decorous and template in its language.
ii. Every petition must be signed by the petitioner and on every sheet on which the petition is written.
iii. Signature shall be valid that is they are handwriting of the person signing and shall be accompanied by names: department and level of the petitioner and his/her post in the association if there is any.
iv. Every petition shall be in English language.
Exhibit A which is the petition that led to the alleged suspension of the claimant from a careful perusal, does not show that it fulfill the above rule stated in paragraph C(ii) and (iii) putting its validity in question. This is because as held in the SU Congress Case
39

decided by this honourable court with suit nos: SUC/UIL/JC/OJ/005/24-25 and SUC/UIL/JC/OJ/007/24- 25 being a consolidated suit where this honourable court held that “It is settled law that where a legislation lays down a procedure for doing a thing, there should be no other method of doing it”.
Your Noble Lords, by Article 13(15)C (16) of the NAAS Constitution, it provides for the power of the Students’ Representative Council (SRC) to suspend an office holder and make recommendation for his or her removal. Here is the extant provision of the law;
(15) The SRC shall by Two-Third (2/3) majority votes of members present exercise the power to suspend and recommend to the congress the removal of a member of CEC (Central Executive Council) after satisfying itself that such officer has fallen short of expectations in the discharge of his or her duties.
(16) The SRC shall have power to investigate any officer of the CEC. If any charge is brought against him or her by an association member and shall recommend the case to the Judiciary council for trial and take action on the report sent back by the judiciary for onward transmission to the congress for an appropriate action.
From the above provision of the law and evidence adduced before the court, it can be seen that the SRC only has the power to suspend an office holder after meeting the required conditions. A suspension does not make an office permanently vacant. This makes the court wonders whether the alleged suspension of the claimant from office who has never been sworn into that office is actually a suspension or a removal in disguise which the SRC lacks the power to do. In paragraph 19 and 20 of the first defendant’s written statement on oath which served as his examination in chief as well as paragraph 8,9 and 10
of that 6th defendant’s, it was averred that a bye election was conducted to fill in the position the Claimant was duly elected into and one may wonder if the Claimant was suspended or removed. By the decision of the Supreme Court in Labour Party v. I.N.E.C (2009) 6 NWLR (Pt. 1137) 315, a bye-election is an election specially held to fill a vacant post. Although, the said bye election was nullified and cancelled as averred by the defendants’ witnesses, there is no way a suspension would have given rise to bye election if it was not meant to be a removal and the right to remove a duly elected office holder lies with the congress after it must have been duly adjudicated upon by the Judicial Council of NAAS and never in the power or authority of the SRC. Students’ Representative Council only has the power to suspend after following the due process and not the power to remove in disguise of suspension that will render an office vacant warranting a bye election to be conducted.
From the evidence adduced by the Claimant in her evidence in chief and also
corroborated by the evidence derived during the cross examination of the 1st defendant that the Claimant was duly elected as the welfare secretary 2-elect of the Nigerian Association of Agricultural Students, University of Ilorin (NAAS) and was not sworn into the office before the issue leading to are suspension was initiated by Exhibit A. The whole spirit and intention of NAAS Constitution is that all elected officer holders must have been duly sworn in and taken oath of office before the issue of his or her suspension can
40

come into limelight. This is because the office must have been legally occupied before its holder can be legally removed, as it will merely amount to building something on nothing and expecting it to stand. This is held in the cases of Stanbic IBTC Bank Plc v. L.G.C. Ltd (2020) 2 NWLR (Pt. 1707)1, VAB Petroleum Inc v. Momah (2013) 14 NWLR (Pt.1374) 284 and UAC v MACFOY (1961)All ER 1169 at 1172 where it was held that “one cannot build something on nothing and expect it to stand; it will certainly collapse”.
Since the constitutional provision under Article 18 Section One (6) of NAAS Constitution which provides that “the electoral commission shall make arrangements for the swearing in of the new officers not later than 7 working days after the second semester examination” has elapsed and by the overriding implication of Article 18 Section One D(1) of NAAS Constitution which provides that “any candidate elected at the general election shall hold office till the swearing in of the new executives”, the Claimant who was a candidate duly elected at the last general election of NAAS University of Ilorin supported by the evidence of the Claimant and first defendant, she shall hold the office of the welfare secretary 2 which she was duly elected into till another new set of executives for another administration and academic year will be elected and sworn in. The swearing in of the Claimant should be carried out at the next sitting of the Students’ Representative Council of NAAS but this does not in any way affect the Claimant from occupying the position of welfare secretary 2 of NAAS, University of Ilorin and carrying out the duties as well as enjoying the benefits arising therefrom.
Therefore, this honourable court grant the 1st , 2nd ,15th, 16th, 19th and 24th prayers contained in the Claimant’s final written address, in the following manner;
1. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the claimant is the Welfare secretary 2 of Nigerian Association of Agricultural Students, Naas, University of Ilorin, Ilorin, Nigeria for the 2024/2025 academic session
2. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the second defendant headed by the first defendant erred in law by not swearing the claimant into office.
3. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the petition brought by the fifth defendant against the claimant on the floor of the second defendant is not competent as required by law and can not be made against an office holder who has never been sworn into the office.
4. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the petition brought by the fifth defendant against the claimant on the floor of the second defendant is ought not to have impede a swearing in process of an elected candidate
AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the second defendant headed by the first defendant swear the claimant in as the Welfare Secretary 2 of Nigerian Association of Agricultural Students, University of Ilorin without any hitch in the process.
1. AN ORDER OF THIS HONORABLE COURT that the defendants pay jointly the sum of Eight Thousand, Seven Hundred and Five naira only (#8,705.00) to the claimant as damages.
41

CONCURRENT JUDGEMENT OF HONOURABLE JUSTICE MUHAMMAD
KAMALDEEN GBEMISOLA, JUSTICE OF STUDENTS’ UNION (JSU)
After a careful perusal of the well-crafted judgment of my learned brother, Honourable Chief Justice of the Students’ Union, I agree with the judgment in its entirety and I agree with the reasoning too .I must say that the issue couched therein is the proper issue for the just determination of this case .The question is can a person who has not taken the oath of office be suspended ?The term suspension means to put an hold to something which has started . Infact ,according to the case of A-G., Cross River v. F.R.N (2019) 10 NWLR (Pt. 1681) 401, the word “suspension” was defined to “means the act of temporary deprivation of a person’s power or privileges especially of office or profession”. Emphasis on the “temporary deprivation”. Again ,the term suspension as defined in Merriam Webster Dictionary defined as the “temporary removal (as from office or privileges)“ .
Was the Welfare secretary ever sworn into office? The answer is no as provided in the evidence adduced by the Claimant in her Written statement on oath and even further affirmed by the defendants’ witnesses. No doubt, the due process was not followed in the making the office of the welfare secretary 2 vacant through removal. The constitution of the National association of Agriculture students is clear and apt as to the requirements that every petition must follow. The above are contained in the Lead judgement of my Lord.
I hereby submit and grant the orders of the presiding justice and I make no order as to cost .
CONCURRENT JUDGEMENT OF HONOURABLE JUSTICE TOHEEB ABDULSAMOD OBASANJO, JUSTICE OF STUDENTS’ UNION (JSU)
Having carefully perused the erudite ruling meticulously crafted and delivered by my esteemed and learned brother Hon. Justice Ismail Khadijat Moromoke, I am compelled by choice to express my unwavering concurrence with the articulated position espoused by the presiding learned justice.
The court is indeed a safe haven for one he who have diligently done his own obligation and hell for he who failed to perfect his own obligation as bestowed upon by the law and it is the last resort of a common man.
The law particularly section 46 of the Constitution of Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999 As Amended, states verbatim that;
46. (1) Any person who alleges that any of the provisions of this Chapter has been, is being or likely to be contravened in any State in relation to him may apply to a High Court in that State for redress. The claimant upon been wrong approached the court for redress which is her constitutional rights after fulfilling her obligations during the election but was never inaugurated. This make the defendants to have failed in upholding the principle of justice. The principle of justice as held in the notorious case of JOSIAH v STATE, “Justice is a tripartite wheel, Justice to the accused person, justice to the defendant and justice to the society whose norm and ethics has been broken.”
In view of the above, while reiterating my position, I concur ipsisima verba with the
   42

position of my learned brother the presiding justice and granting the same reliefs.
APPEARANCES
FOR THE CLAIMANT:
P.O. Oyebanji SAU SALC O.D. Fatoye SAU
M.A. Ajenifuja SAU
E.F. Ashaolu SAU
A.T. Koleoso SAU O.T. Anifowoshe A.K. Nasiru
A.A. Oyewo
T.Q. Gbadamosi
A.A. Amolegbe
F.O. Ameen
FOR THE DEFENDANTS: F.A. Adebayo SAU
S. O. Lawal
R. B. Obisesan
AMICUS CURAE:
A.O. Alimi, President of the Students’ Union Bar
