IN THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN HOLDEN AT UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN ON THURSDAY, APRIL 3RD, 2025. SUIT NO: SUC/UIL/JC/OJ/006/24-25 CITATION N0: (2025) 13 USLR
BEFORE THEIR LORDSHIPS:
HON. JUSTICE ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE, CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT (PRESIDING JUSTICE)
HON. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD KAMALDEEN GBEMISOLA, JUSTICE OF STUDENTS’ UNION COURT
HON. JUSTICE TOHEEB ABDULSAMOD OBASANJO, JUSTICE OF STUDENTS’ UNION COURT
BETWEEN
AKERELE SUCCESS AYOMIPOSI ...................................CLAIMANT AND
1. SPEAKER, NIGERIAN ASSOCIATION OF AGRICULTURAL STUDENTS (NAAS), UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN
2....STUDENTS' REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL (SRC), NIGERIAN ASSOCIATION OF AGRICULTURAL STUDENTS (NAAS), UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN
3....SENATOR YUSUF SHEU-IBRAHIM
4....OMOJAIYE OLUWADAMILOLA
5....ASUNMOGE IKMOT OLAJUMOKE
6....HON. TOYYEX, CHAIRMAN DISCIPLINARY COMMITTEE...........................................................DEFENDANTS
RATIO DECIDENDI
The ratio decidendi of this ruling revolves around the grant of interim injunctions ex parte based on urgent circumstances. The Students’ Union Court of the University of Ilorin, through the lead judgment of Hon. Justice Ismail Khadijat Moromoke, held that such injunctions can be granted when the applicant demonstrates:
(a) the existence of a legal right;
104
(b) that the right has been or is being threatened;
(c) that there is a serious issue to be tried;
(d) that the balance of convenience is in favour of the applicant;
(e) that irreparable damage or injury would result if the injunction is not granted;
(f) that the applicant gives an undertaking as to damages in the event the decision is ultimately found unfavourable.
The ruling emphasized the discretionary and equitable nature of interim injunctions, referencing multiple Nigerian appellate decisions that prioritize the urgency, justice, and fairness in granting such orders.
PRONOUNCEMENTS OF THE JUSTICES
The applicant must not only establish the existence of a right, the applicant must show that the legal right he has had been threatened and ought to be urgently protected.
An injunction is a judicial remedy of an equitable nature by which a person is ordered to refrain from doing or to do a particular act or thing. Also, Trial courts should be reluctant to make interim orders ex parte unless the circumstances are exceptional and the opposing party cannot be put on notice. An ex parte application for an order of interim injunction must never be seen as a surreptitious contrivance for muzzling the right of the other party...
An interim injunction... is for the meantime or meanwhile. It is granted for a specifically defined period, which is normally short.”
The order in a motion is meant to forestall irreparable injury to the applicant’s legal or equitable right.”establish by affidavit evidence that there is a substantial issue to be tried at the hearing. -PER ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE, CJSU
JUDGMENT AND ORDERS
After examining the motion ex parte, supporting affidavit of urgency, and legal arguments, the Court found merit in the application and granted the following interim orders for a period of twelve (12) days, pending the determination of the motion on notice and substantive suit: An interim injunction reinstating the applicant as the Welfare Secretary 2-elect of the Faculty of Agriculture.
An injunction restraining the defendants from tampering with the reputation and office of the applicant.
An injunction restraining the 4th defendant from portraying or occupying the office of Welfare Secretary
These orders were to subsist until the hearing scheduled for April 7, 2025.
COURT RULING ON MOTION EX PARTE DELIVERED BY HON. JUSTICE
ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE, CJSU
This is a ruling on motion ex parte wherein the claimant/applicant is praying this honourable court for :
  105

1. AN INTERIM INJUNCTION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT reinstating the applicant as the Welfare Secretary 2 of Faculty of Agriculture pending the determination of the motion on notice filed contemporaneous before this court
2. AN INTERIM INJUNCTION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT prohibiting and restraining the defendants/respondents from tampering with the continuity of office of the Welfare Secretary 2 of Faculty of Agriculture being the claimant/applicant in this instant suit pending the determination of the motion on notice filed contemporaneous before this court
3. AN INTERIM INJUNCTION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT prohibiting and restraining 4th defendant/respondent from portraying or occupying the office of the Welfare Secretary 2 of Faculty of Agriculture pending the determination of the motion on notice filed contemporaneous before this court and the omnibus prayer.
Accompanying the process was an affidavit of urgency of 25 paragraph deposed to by one Akerele Success stating facts contained therein. Learned counsel to the claimant, Oyebanji Paul Shitta (SAU) filed a written before this court wherein a sole issue was couched ;
Whether or not an interim injunction can be granted giving the circumstances of urgency in this instant case?
Counsel to the applicant contended answered in the affirmative relying on the ingredients stated In the case of AKAPO V. HAKEEM-HABEEB [1992] 6 NWLR (PT. 247) 266 @ 289 as follows :
(1.) existence of legal right
(2) substantial issue to be tried
(3) balance of convenience
(4) irreparable damage or injury (5) conduct of the parties
(6) Undertaking as to damages.
Also, relying on the case of KOTOYE V. CENTRAL BANK OF NIGERIA (1989) 1 NWLR (PT 98) 419 @ 441 – 442 where my Lord Nnaemeka-Agu JSC of blessed memory submitted thus;
“The basis of granting an ex parte order of injunction..........is the existence of special circumstances, invariably, all pervading real urgency, which requires that the order must be made, otherwise an irretrievable harm or injury would be occasioned to the prejudice of the applicant.”
The learned counsel relied on BANK BOSTON NA USA & ORS V. VICTOR ADEGOROYE & ANOR (2002) 2 NWLR (PT. 644) 217 made the position thus;
“...There is no doubt that it is a very useful jurisdiction to be invoked only in cases of extreme urgency as where a building may be demolished, a property taken out of jurisdiction
106

or some other grave irreversible injury caused if the order is not made. It is a jurisdiction to be sparingly and responsibly invoked and only in cases which justify its use”
See also ADIATU LADUNNI V. OLUDOYIN ADEKUNLE KUKOYI & OTHERS (SC 27/1970) [1972] NGSC 2 (2 MARCH 1972): CHIEF YESUFU A. ONIRU AND ANOTHER V. WAHAHI GHADAMOSI, S.C. 328/69 DECIDED ON THE 23RD DECEMBER, 1971)
Also relying on paragraphs 11, 12, 13, 14 ,15, 16, 17 and 18 of the affidavit of urgency establishing the urgency of this matter before the court and the need for the reinstatement of the applicant .
Relying on the case of SARAKI V. KOTOYE (SUPRA), the counsel to the applicant described irreparable damage was defined as injury which is substantial and cannot be adequately remedied or atoned for by damages. he argued that it is clear from the whole of the affidavit or urgency that an irreparable loss and unending damage would be done if the applicant is not reinstated. This damage to him would extend to every nook and cranny of the NAAS and no amount of damages can cure or put an end to this loss.
He stated that on the last condition of undertaking as to damages, it is evident from Paragraph 24 of the Affidavit of urgency that the claimant has made an undertaking as o damages should in case the substantive suit comes out against her favor.
He submitted on this issue that premise on the fulfilment of the condition(s) precedents, an interim injunction can be granted in this instance
Now, the Ruling of This Court
This court deems it fits that the issue couched by the claimant applicant is the proper issue for the just determination of this application.This court seeks to adopt same but with a bit of modification:
“Whether the Claimant/Applicant has sufficiently placed before my Lord, facts upon which an order of interim injunction may be granted in his favour”
In C.B.N. v U.T.B (NIG.) LTD (1996)4 NWLR (pt. 445)694 "An injunction is a judicial remedy of an equitable nature by which a person is ordered to refrain from doing or to do a particular act or thing". In Aniakor v. Nigeria Police Force (2014)15 NWLR (pt.1429)155 " an injunction is a command from a court of law directing a party to do an act which is specified, and which is essential to justice, or to refrain from doing a stated act which is wrong or inequitable" see also OHAKIM v AGBASO (2010)19 NWLR (pt. 1226)172.
While an interim injunction as held in In PEREPIMODE V. MIEKORO (1992) 2 NWLR (PT. 224) 483, “is usually made in cases of extreme urgency and without notice to the other side, but it is usually granted for a very short period subject to a motion on notice being filed contemporaneously to the same effect. Kotoye v. Central Bank of Nigeria (1989) 1 NWLR (Pt.98) 419”. In fact in 7Up Bottling Co. v. AbiolaSons Ltd. (1989) 4 NWLR (Pt. 114) 229, the court held that “an ex parte application for an order of interim injunction must never be seen as a surreptitious contrivance for muzzling the right of the other party to the suit by indirectly denying him a fair hearing by a mischievous application of the procedure
 107

governing ex parte motions”. Hence as held in Itama v Osaro-Lai (2000)6 NWLR (Pt. 661) 515, “ Trial courts should be reluctant to make interim orders exparte unless the circumstances are exceptional and the opposing party cannot be put on notice” This is because “the grant of an interim order of injunction is an equitable remedy within the discretionary powers of a court, which must be exercised judicially and judiciously taking all the relevant circumstances of the matter into account and consideration” See Pharma Deko PLC. V. F.D.C. Ltd (2015)10 NWLR (pt. 1467)225
An application for interim injunction seeks a discretionary remedy. It is settled law that all judicial discretions must be exercised judicially and judiciously. An application for interim or ex-parte injunction may be properly made in a case of extreme urgency. It should only be used when the case is one of real urgency requiring immediate relief. See: Kotoye vs.C.B.N.and others (1989) 1 NWLR (Pt.98) 419 at 442; and Unibiz (Nig.) Ltd. vs.C.B.C.L Ltd. (2003) 6 NWLR (Pt.816) 402.
The order in a motion is meant to forestall irreparable injury to the applicant’s legal or equitable right. See: Madubuike vs. Madubuike (2001) 9NWLR (PT.719) 689 at 709; and Okomu Oil Palm Co. vs. Tajudeen (2016) 3NWLR (Pt.1499)284 at 296.
The principal factors to consider in an application for interim injunction are as follows:
I. The applicant must establish the existence of a legal right;
II. That there is a serious question or substantial issue to be tried;
III. That the balance of convenience is in favour of the applicant;
IV. That damages cannot be adequate compensation for the injury he wants to prevent;
V. Thattherewasnodelayonthepartoftheapplicantinbringingtheapplication;and
VI. That the applicant must give an undertaking to pay damages in the event of a wrongful exercise of the Court’s discretion in granting the injunction.
See the following decisions on the point: Kotoye v C.B.N.(1989) 1 NWLR (Pt.98) 419; Buhari v Obasanjo (2003) 17 NWLR (Pt.850) 587; and Adeleke v Lawal (2014) 3 NWLR (Pt.1393)1at 5.
Now the next is the ascertain whether or not the claimant has satisfied the above factors from the motion exparte brought by the claimant/applicant.
On the first principal factor to consider which is the most important, the establishment of the existence of a legal right by the claimant. I must say that the claimant must not only establish the existence of a right,the applicant must show that the legal right he has had been threatened and ought to be urgently protected.See the case of Ojukwu vs Governor of Lagos State (1986) 3 NWLR (Pt.26) 39; Akapo vs Hakeem Habeeb (1992) 6 NWLR (Pt.247) 266-289.
Going by the supporting affidavit, I must say that the applicant by virtue of paragraph 1&4 has established his legal right which is the fact that he won the election to which he was given the mandate of the welfare secretary 2 of Nigerian Association Of Agricultural Students (NAAS), University of Ilorin for the 2024/2025 academic session in paragraph Also , paragraph 4,5,6,10 his right was threatened by the defendant. Iam of the view that the
108

Applicant has adduced sufficient evidence to establish the fact that he has a legal right to protect in relation to the issues to be determined in the substantive suit.
Furthermore, there is a sense of urgency surrounding this application which is clearly enshrined in the 11,12, 14 and 15 . Particularly, paragraph 15 of the affidavit where it is stated thus :
15. That all meetings aforementioned between I and the external benefactors are fixed and expected to be consummated nothing later than 7th of April, 2025 and the second one, 14th of April, 2025.
On the second principal factor ,which is That the claimant must show that there is a serious question or substantial issue to be tried. The supporting affidavit shows in paragraph 4,5,6,7,8,9,10 that there is indeed a serious question and substantial issue to be tried .Infact ,the writ of summon shows the above I am of the view that the applicant has established sufficient evidence to show that a serious question or substantial issue is to be tried.
On the third principal factor ,which is that the balance of convenience is in favour of the applicant.
On the balance of convenience, the applicant must show that the balance of convenience is on his side. In the classical case of Kotoye v C.B.N. (1989) 1 NWLR (Pt.98) 419, the Supreme Court explained that the applicant must establish that more justice will result in granting the application than in refusing it.
In the present application,the applicant has indeed adduced fact to show that justice will result in granting the application than in refusing it . According to him and in paragraph 16,17,22,23 that there will be injustice if the application is not granted.The paragraphs shows that the welfarism of the people of Nigeria Association of agricultural students (NAAS) is at stake and injustice will be done if not granted.
Next is on the inadequacy of damages as a requirement,the court American Cyanamid Co. vs Ethicon Ltd. (1975) 1 ALL E.R. at 504 pp 5l0, the Court stated that:
“If damages ...would be an adequate remedy and the defendant would be in a financial position to pay them, no interlocutory injunction should normally be granted, however strong the plaintiff’s claim appeared to be at that stage.”
The supporting affidavit as a whole shows that an irreparable damages would be done in particular, paragraph 23 shows that there are irreparable damages to suffered. To add to this ,the written address in paragraph 9 line 3 shows the extent of the damage.
On the conduct of the Applicant, I must say that although the applicant did not state in the affidavit how he has tried to ameliorate the situation on ground .The written affidavit in paragraph 11 of the written address that he hasn't relaxed in a second.
Finally on the need for the applicant to give an undertaking as to damages , paragraph 24 avails the applicant where he stated thus :
24.That I undertake to pay damages, should the outcome of the substantive suit be against me. 109

In fact it is held in Nigeria- Arab Bank Ltd v. Ogueri (1990)6 NWLR (pt.159) 751 "what is really required in an application for interim injunction is that the applicant should establish by his affidavit evidence that there is a substantial issue to be tried at the hearing" and this has already been established with the motion on notice as was the writ of summons filed contemporaneously with this motion exparte as well as the affidavit in support of it that there is indeed, a Substantive issue to be tried in the main suit to this motion.
An interim injunction as held in EZEBILO v CHINWUBA (1997)7 NWLR (pt. 511)108 “is granted ex parte is for the meantime or meanwhile. It is granted for a specifically defined period, which is normally short. It is an intervening court process which abates the moment the application for the interlocutory injunction is heard.
Therefore this motion exparte succeeds with the following orders to subsists pending the hearing of the interlocutory injunction (i.e motion on notice) and the writ of summons filed contemporaneously with it which have been served on the defendants to be held on Monday, 7th April, 2025 in faculty of law new moot court. These orders are as follows:
1. AN INTERIM INJUNCTION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT reinstating the applicant as the Welfare Secretary 2 elect of Faculty of Agriculture for twelve (12) days and pending the determination of the motion on notice filed contemporaneous before this court
2. AN INTERIM INJUNCTION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT prohibiting and restraining the defendants/respondents from tampering with the reputation of the claimant/applicant in this instant suit as the welfare secretary 2-elect of Faculty of Agriculture to enable her carries out duties and functions ancillary to that reputation for twelve days and pending the determination of the motion on notice filed contemporaneous before this court
3. AN INTERIM INJUNCTION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT prohibiting and restraining 4th defendant/respondent from portraying or occupying the office of the Welfare Secretary 2 of Faculty of Agriculture pending the determination of the motion on notice filed contemporaneous before this court.
HON. JUSTICE TOHEEB ABDULSAMOD OBASANJO (JSU):
Having meticulously perused the erudite ruling meticulously crafted and delivered by my esteemed and learned brother, as well as the sagacious and well-reasoned pronouncement of the Presiding Justice, I am compelled to express my unwavering concurrence with the meticulously articulated position espoused by them.
HONOURABLE JUSTICE MUHAMMED KAMALDEEN GBEMISOLA, JSU:
After a careful perusal and a meticulous read of the ruling drafted and written by my esteemed learned brother , honourable justice Ismail Khadijah ,I must say that the reasoning and analogy therein resonate fully with mine .I am compelled to express my unwavering concurrence with the ruling in its entirety.
