1 | P a g e  
 
ABDULLAHI DAGBO v FINANCIAL SECRETARY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
CHAMBERS  
CITATION: (2019) LCELR 1819003 
In the Law Students‟ Society Court Of Unilorin 
ON THURSDAY, 6th May, 2019. 
Suit No: LSSJ/010/19 
Before Their Lordships: 
Hon. Judge AbdulkareemAbdulrazzaqKetu – Chief Judge, LSS Court of Unilorin 
Hon. Judge Tunji Lawal Bolaji - Judge, LSS Court of Unilorin 
Hon. Judge Muhammed Olatoyinbo - Judge, LSS Court of Unilorin 
 
BETWEEN 
ABDULLAHI SOLIU DAGBO 
 Claimant 
AND 
FINANCIAL SECRETARY, HUMAN RIGHTS CHAMBERS 
Defendant 

2 | P a g e  
 
RATIO DECIDENDI 
1. ADMINISTRATIVE LAW : WHEN A PREROGATIVE  ORDER OF 
MANDAMUS IS GRANTED  
It is also crystal clear that the granting of order of mandamus in any ministerial or 
administrative duty is subject to discretionary power of court to examine the fact of the 
case and determine that Order of mandamus applies. In examining the fact, court should 
factor in the main purpose of order of mandamus which is to facilitate justice or purpose 
of Justice. This is due to the extraordinary nature of the order, it is only granted where 
there is no remedy or the available remedy is insufficient to rectif y any wrong. P er 
Abdulkareem Abdulrazzaq Ketu JLSS, at pg. 9 
2. ADMINISTRATIVE LAW : WHETHER A  PRE-ACTION NOTICE  IS AN 
APPLICATION FOR DEMAND REQUIRED IN RELATION TO ORDER OF 
MANDAMUS 
from the application for demand requires in relation to order of mandamus. The latter is 
used to notify Defendant that an action is likely to be or will be taken against him/her in 
court of law. See. VISITOR, IMO STATE UNIVERSITY & ORS v. PROF. INNOCENT 
CHUKA OKONKWO & ORS (2014) AELR 3156 (CA), (CA/OW/263/2011). However, 
the principle of demand and ref usal is a requirement of law which must be fulfilled not 
until there is statutory provision to that effect but Pre -action notice will only be issued 
when there is statutory provision for that. See NATIONAL AGENCY FOR FOOD AND 
DRUGS ADMINISTRATION AND CONTR OL v. MR. EUGINE S.ONWUKA (2013) 
AELR 3002 (CA) [CA/K/128/2009] per Abdulkareem Abdulrazzaq Ketu JLSS, at Pg. 10 
3. CONSTITUTIONAL LAW: INTERPRETATION OF THE CONSTITUTION 
ZAMFARA STATE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY SERVICE COMMISSION AND ORS 
VS GOVERNOR OF ZAMFARA STATE (CA /S/60/2013) where the court held that the 
constitution is the supreme law of land. Any interpretation that is in a bid to excuse the 
recklessness of the executives impliedl y amends the provision of constitution to justify 
the inexcusable and unjustifiable infringement of the constitution should not be adopted. 
 See also A.G OGUN STATE VS A.G FEDERATION (2002) 18 N.W.L.R (Pt. 798) 232. 
Per Tunji-lawal Lawal Bolaji, JLSS, at Pg. 24 
4.   COURT ORDER: OBESIANCE TO ORDERS OF THE COURT 
It is not right on any person or authority to flaunt order of court. Court and its orders are 
meant to be obeyed. Per Muhammed  said in OMOPUPA V. PRO I OF HUMAN 
RIGHTS CHAMBERS (supra) that "As regarding flaunting the order of the court, I must 
state categorically that a court order comes to effect, from date of issuance or 
pronouncement, and it must be respected and obeyed. Cour t Orders or judgments are not 
permitted to be treated with arrogance and levity. An order made within jurisdiction is 
not invalid or nullity even if it is erroneous in fact or in law or even perverse. The option 
usually open to a person or persons to whom an order of Court is made and who is 
dissatisfied or aggrieved have their remedies on Appeal against the said order or simply 

3 | P a g e  
 
apply to have the order set aside as the case maybe. To therefore disobey an order of the 
court under the misguided belief that th e said order is null for any reason whatsoever, 
even if subsequently turns out to be so in the end, would be to court active legal danger 
with all unpleasant consequences that this may subsequently attract. The danger 
axiomatic is contempt. I relied on the  following cases LAWRENCE KANU & ANOR V. 
LAWRENCE OBETA & ORS reported in 2015 (SUIT NO: CA/OW/261/2012)  
OUGULEYE V. AINA (2012) 28 WRN 41; (2013) ALL FWLR (PT. 602) 1681; 
LABOUR PARTY V. INEC (2008) 35WRN 89; (2008) 13NWLR (PT. 1103) 73; ODU 
V. JOLAOSO (20 05) 16 NWLR (PT. 950) 178” per Ab dulkareem Abdulrazzaq Ketu 
JLSS, at Pg. 18 
5. COURT: WHETHER THE COURT IS INCLINED TO DO SUBSTANTIVE 
JUSTICE  
Courts have warned against technical justice at the expense of substantive justice. See 
SENATOR (MRS.) EME UFOT EKAETE v. UNION BANK OF NIGERIA PLC (2014) 
AELR 4143 (CA) [suit no; CA/A/198/2010], Court of Appeal held as follows; 
“No Court administering law and equity will allow technical arguments to defeat the 
course of justice. Technical arguments to defe at the course of justice was rejected in G. 
B. Ollivant, Ltd. vs. C. A. Vanderpuye (1935) 2 WACA 368 when the Court held at page 
370 that: "As to the second objection, the contention of the respondent appears to be 
correct, but it is of a purely technical nature, and this Court will not refuse to attempt to 
do substantial Justice between the parties upon a pure technicality..."  CENTRAL BANK 
OF NIGERIA v. OKEB NIGERIA LIMITED & ORS (2014) AELR 4191 (CA)[Suit No: 
CA/A/554/2013],  MTN NIGERIA COMMUNICATIONS LIMITED v. MRS TAIBATU 
BABAYODE (2014) AELR 4623 (CA)[Suit No: CA/AK/18M/2013]. Per Abdulkareem 
Abdulrazzaq Ketu JLSS, at Pg. 10 
6. LEGAL MAXIMS: APPLICATION OF THE MAXIM- lex cogit ad impossibilia  
The maxim according to black law dictionary 2nd edition means: “the law does not 
compel impossibilities”. See BULUNKUTU VS. ZANGINA (1997) 11 NWLR (PT.529) 
526 AT 539 – 540. However for this maxim to apply, such impossibilities must be 
objective and not subjec tive. By objective, we mean a reasonable man acting reasonably 
would believe in the circumstance that carrying out such duty is impossible, but all the 
reasons adduced by the defendant lacks merit and cannot be considered. There is an 
equitable maxim which  says: “he who come equity must come with clean hand”. See 
ADEJUMO VS AYANTEGBE (1989) 3 NWLR [110] 47, OILFIELD SUPPLY 
CENTRE LTD VS JOHNSON (1987)2 NWLR (58) 625. Therefore equity will not aid 
her in this circumstance because her act is inexcusable. Thus , I hold that the doctrine of 
lex non cogit ad impossibilia cannot be invoked in this circumstance.   Therefore, her 
failure to publish the statement of account will amount to a breach of the constitutional 
duty she swore to protect. Per Muhammad Olatoyinbo JLSS, at Pg. 24.  

4 | P a g e  
 
As to the applicability of the Maxim „lex non cogit ad impossibilia‟ to this case. The 
Maxim means “The law does not compel to impossible ends". The truism cannot be 
denied that the court in making orders should desist fr om making orders in vain and not 
make an order that are impossible to be obeyed or implemented. See BULUNKUTU v 
ZANGINA (1997) 11 NWLR (Pt 529) 526 @ 529 -540. It follows therefore that for the 
applicability of this rule, the party invoking it must show in clear terms how the particular 
law or order is impossible to be obeyed or executed. Per Tunji -lawal Lawal Bolaji, JLSS, 
at Pg. 26 
7. PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE: APPLICATION FOR DEFAULT JUDGMENT 
On the application for default judgement; it is sacrosanct that parties sh ould be given 
adequate fair hearing in any proceeding for determination of right and liability. However, 
it is not the duty of the court to ensure that parties utilitse the opportunity behind fair 
hearing. The duty of the court is just to create an avenue for the opportunity to be used. 
SEE ATUNDE AHMAD OLANREWAJU V. THE SPEAKER, LSS HOUSE OF REPS 
with suit no SUJ/003/17.where parties failed to used the opportunity, the court can 
proceed to enter default judgement if it is defendant that defaults OR treat t he matter 
undefemded. But if it is claimant, the case will be struck out, see BELLO v. INEC 
(2010)8 NWLR [1196]324. Looking at the instances of this case, defendant‟s absence in 
court is happening for the first time in the history of the case. It is necess ary to know 
what actually cause this absence, before any conclusion is made. This honourable court 
considers giving the defendant another opportunity to defend her case and to actually 
know what cause their absence. 
Although, a justice delayed is justice is denied but justice rushed is justice crushed. Court 
must be wary of principle of natural justice and fair hearing at all necessary time. On the 
above, we hereby hold that this honourable court will give the defendant another 
opportunity to defend her cas e and the application for default judgement is 
discountenance with and same is rejected. Per Ab dulkareem Abdulrazzaq Ketu JLSS , at 
Pg. 11 
8. RULES OF INTERPRETATION: THE LITERAL RULE OF INTERPRETATION  
It is also trite law that whenever the provision of the law is clear and unambiguous, court 
should not become fashion designer to shape and design new clothe for the statute. This 
means that Statute should not be given another clothes so far its natural cloth e does not 
portray irrationality and injustice. All in all, literal interpretation should be resorted to 
where it does not lead to absurdity. ELELU -HABEEB V AG FED AND ORS(2012) 13 
NWLR [1318] 423 SC, DASUKI AHMAD OLUWANISHOLA & ANOR V. HUMAN 
RIGHTS CHAMBE RS & 3 ORS (suit no LSSJ/005/2018). Per Abdulkareem 
Abdulrazzaq Ketu JLSS (as he then was), Pg. 15-16 
9. WORDS AND PHRASE : „MANDAMUS‟  
Mandamus is defined in ASSOCIATED DISCOUNT HOUSE LIMITED V. HON. MIN. 
OF FCT (2013) 8 NWLR [1357] 493 at 509 as “an extraordinary writ (order) issued by a 

5 | P a g e  
 
court of competent jurisdiction to an inferior tribunal, a public official, an administrative 
agency, a corpor ation or any person compelling the performance of an act usually when 
there is a duty under the law to perform an act, the plaintiff has a clear right to such 
performance, and there is no other adequate remedy available.” per Abdulkareem 
Abdulrazzaq Ketu JLSS, at Pg. 8 
10. WORDS AND PHRASES: „SHALL‟  
It is a settled law that wherever and whenever the word "SHALL" is used. The general 
implication of such is that anything that results from there is an obligation and 
compulsive duty. FEDERAL UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY, AKURE & ANOR V. 
ACADEMIC STAFF UNION OF UNIVERSITIES (ASUU) (CA) [Suit No: 
CA/AK/93/2011]; 
"The use and meaning of the word "shall" in a statute has been the subject of judicial 
attention in a number of cases of this Court and the Supreme Court. In all those decisions 
the Courts have emphasized that in its ordinary meaning "shall" is a word of c ommand 
which must be given an obligatory meaning as denoting compulsion and has the 
invaluable consequence of excluding the thought of discretion of impose a duty which 
must be enforced. See IFEZUE V. MBADUGHA (1984) 1 SCNLR 427 and ADAMS V. 
UMAR (2009) 5 NWLR (Pt. 1133) 41."there are instances where the word will be given 
another meaning, in KAMBA v KAMBA (2005) 4 NWLR part 914. "... the word should 
be on a case by case basis; in this court's opinion that is why, "It is now trite that the word 
"shall" does not always mean "must" - a matter of compulsion. It could be interpreted, 
where the context so admits as "may"; whereas "may" is also not always "may" "It may 
sometimes be equivalent to "shall". Per Abdulkareem Abdulrazzaq Ketu JLSS, at Pg. 14 - 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
 
LEAD JUDGEMENT DELIVERED BY HON. JUDGE ABDULKAREEM 
ABDURRAZZAQ KETU JLSS; 
The fact of the case was that Financial Secretary of the Human Right Chambers failed to publish 
Statement of account of the Chamber as it was directed by the Constitution of the Chambers. It 
was on this basis that claimant approached this court to interpre t the provision of article 4 
paragraph 4 of the constitution of the Chamber.  
Life was breathed to this case by an originating summon brought pursuant to order 2 rule 2 of 
LSS Court rules (as amended) 2019. It was dated 5 of February, 2019. In the originating 
summon, two issues were couched for determination of the court. They read thus; 
1. Whether or Not the word “shall” as used in art. 4 paragraph 4 of the Constitution of human 
rights Chambers 2018 is to be construed as shall or permissive? 
2. Whether or not the defendant has breached the provision of art. 4 para. 4 of the constitution of 
Human rights Chambers (CoHRC) 2018 and failed in her duty to uphold the rule of law?  
Claimant thereafter sought for the following relieves; 
1. A declaration of this Honou rable Court that the word shall as used in art. 4 para 4 of CoHRC 
is of mandatory effect and is to be construed as compelling, mandatory and equally 
obligatory. 
2. A declaration of this Honourable Court that the defendant has failed to comply with the 
provision of art. 4 para 4 of CoHRC. 
3. A declaration of this Honourable Court that the defendant has failed to uphold the Rule of law 
as a result of her non-compliance with the said constitutional provision. 
4. An order of this Honourable Court compelling and mandatin g the defendant to perform her 
Constitutional duty imposes by the provision of art. 4 para 4 of CoHRC at the end of each 
month. 
5. An order of this Honourable Court compelling and mandating the defendant to tender a 
written apology to the chambers at the next  chamber meeting after the determination of this 
suit. 
6. An order of this Honourable Court compelling and mandating the defendant to pay a token of 
₦2000 as the cost of this litigation. 
7. And such further order(S) or declaration(s) as this Honourable Court may  deem fit to make in 
the circumstance of this case. 

7 | P a g e  
 
This is supported by eight paragraphs affidavit which was deposed to by the claimant, and 
written address. All processes were dated 5th of February 2019 and filed on the same date. On 
25th of April 2019, claimant sought the leave of court to adopt all the processes as filed, the 
leave was granted and the processes were deemed adopted. 
Defendant filed a preliminary objection to claimant's originating summon challenging the 
jurisdiction of this Honourable Court on the following grounds; 
1. That the claimant has not complied with the required condition precedent for the granting 
of an order of mandamus against Defendant. 
2. That the claimant has no reasonable cause of action. 
3. That this Honourable Court lacks the jurisdiction to entertain this suit. 
In lieu of the above, sole issue was couched for determination that whether or not this 
Honourable Court has the requisite jurisdiction to entertain the case of the claimant? The issue 
was argued on two stand points.  
1. That the claimant has not complied with the required condition precedent for the granting 
of an order of mandamus against the defendant. 
2. That the claimant has no reasonable cause of action.  
On the first stand point; Defendant stated the meaning of order of ma ndamus and conditions 
precedent attached to the order. Defendant further argued that of all the conditions, claimant had 
not fulfilled the condition of demand for the performance of the said duty. On that basis, 
Defendant contended that condition precedent had not been fulfilled. These following cases were 
cited; OHAKIM V. AGBASO (2011) 47 NSCQR 324 @ 367. SHITTA BAY V. FEDERAL 
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION (1981) 1 S C. 40, FAWEHINMI V. AKILU (1987) 4 
NWLR (67) 797, inter alia. 
On the second stand point, Defendant argued that flowing from the first stand point; claimant did 
not have cause of action to prosecute the case. Defendant submitted that the claimant had no 
cause of action. Reliance was placed on the following cases  ADESOKAN V. ADEREGOLU 
(1997) NWL R (493) 261 SC, ULEGEDE V. COMMISSIONER OF AGRICULTURE 
(1996)8 NWLR [367] 437,  inter alia. Defendant prayed for an order of this Honourable Court 
striking out or dismissing the suit of the claimant for being fundamentally defective, grossly 
incompetent and  outside the jurisdictional competence of this Honourable Court and for such 
further order(S) as this Honourable Court may deem fit to make in the circumstance of the case. 
Claimant hereby replied thus; " it is our vehement contention that the defendant‟s p reliminary 
objection cannot hold water because it is clear after the strict perusal of the whole constitution 
of HRC (2018) as amended that there is no express provision which requires that a public officer 

8 | P a g e  
 
should be noticed before bring a law suit against  him/her. Though, condition precedent is 
essential rather it is mandatory but only if there is statutory provision for such this was 
underscore by Milord hon. Justice Karibi -whyte in the case of  AMADI V. NNPC (2000) 10 
NWLR [674]"  claimant prayed that the preliminary objection should be struck out. 
Defendant‟s Counsel‟s reply on point of law was not substantive but a mere kind of re -arguing 
their case. 
  
RULING ON DEFENDANT PRELIMINARY OBJECTION 
Having listened to both parties on merit, this Honourable  Court proceed to give the following 
ruling. For easy elucidation of the ruling, an issued was couched thus; 
 Whether or not condition precedent has been fulfilled? 
It is trite principle of law that before any court can assume jurisdiction on any matter, ce rtain 
elements must be pre -existing. One of the elements is conditions precedent; the absence of this 
element will prevent court from assuming jurisdiction on any matter. See  ALL 
PROGRESSIVES CONGRESS v. MR JOSEPH OLUJIMI KOLAWOLE AGBAJE & 
ORS (2015) AELR 7918 (CA) [Suit No: CA/L/EP/GOV./751A/2015], NKEMDILIM v. 
MADUKOLU (1962) 2 NCNLR (Pt. 341) 348 . Any matter entertains by court with this defect 
is nullity and of no effect.  DASUKI & ANOR V. HUMAN RIGHTS CHAMBERS & 3 ORS 
suit no. LSSJ/005/2018, M. A. OMOPU PA V PRO 1, HUMAN RIGHTS CHAMBERS suit 
no. LSSJ/005/2019.  
In the same vein, it is argued that claimant's prayers will impliedly warrant court to grant an 
order of mandamus. Mandamus is defined in  ASSOCIATED DISCOUNT HOUSE LIMITED 
V. HON. MIN. OF FCT (2013 ) 8 NWLR [1357] 493 at 509  as “an extraordinary writ (order) 
issued by a court of competent jurisdiction to an inferior tribunal, a public official, an 
administrative agency, a corporation or any person compelling the performance of an act 
usually when the re is a duty under the law to perform an act, the plaintiff has a clear right to 
such performance, and there is no other adequate remedy available.”   This means mandamus is 
an order compelling a person in an official capacity to perform its constitutionally or statutorily 
ordained duty. However, this order is built on certain conditions as thus; 
1.  A law imposes on a public or government body, authority, department or official the  
performance of a public duty. 
2. The claimant has a legal int erest whose enjoyment or enforcement directly or substantially 
depends on the performance of that public duty by the said body. 
3. Claimant's motive is reasonable. 

9 | P a g e  
 
4. A distinct and clear demand for the performance of the duty has been made and that the sa id 
body or authority or department has refused to comply, 
See OHAKIM V. AGBASO (2011) 47 NSCQR 324 @ 367, ULEGEDE V. COMMISSIONER 
OF AGRICULTURE (1996) 8 NWLR [367] 437, CHIEF EMMANUEL UTAVEGHO & ORS. 
V. MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (1957-58) NWLR 179. 
The fourth condition stated here is the backbone of the preliminary objection, however, there are 
exceptions to this condition, and the exceptions are thus; 
1. When the nature of the duty is Ministerial or administrative. 
2. When the defendant has made himself unavailable for demand of performance. 
3. When the performance of same has lapsed or stipulated time for the performance of same 
has passed. 
In all these situations, the condition is dispensed with. 
See Order 2 Rules 4 of LSS COURT RULES 2019 AS AMEMDED. In the c ase of ALI V. 
CBN & ORS (2016) LPELR -41611 Court of Appeal quoted the decision of Supreme Court in  
ALADE SHITTA BAY V. FED. PUBLIC SERV. COMMISSION(1981) 7 SC as thus; “...in 
compelling performance of public (or statutory) duty by an inferior Tribunal or a  government 
functionary, the court will consider carefully whether the duty is of Judicial, quasi -judicial or of 
a merely ministerial nature. If the duty is of Judicial, quasi -judicial nature, the order will issue 
only where there has been a refusal to per form that duty in any event...if, however, the duty is of 
a ministerial character the order of mandamus will issue to compel the specific act to be done in 
the manner which appears to the court be lawful…” 
From the above, the quest for demand -and-refusal is not factored in regarding ministerial or 
administrative duty, it trite law that Expressio Unis Est Exclusio ulterius , see  SUN 
INSURANCE NIGERIA PLC v. UMEZ ENGINEERING CONSTRUCTION COMPANY 
LIMITED (2015) AELR 6651 (SC) Suit No: SC.316/2010.  It is also crystal clear that the 
granting of order of mandamus in any ministerial or administrative duty is subject to 
discretionary power of court to examine the fact of the case and determine that Order of 
mandamus applies. In examining the fact, court should factor in the main purpose of order of 
mandamus which is to facilitate justice or purpose of Justice. This is due to the extraordinary 
nature of the order, it is only granted where there is no remedy or the avail able remedy is 
insufficient to rectify any wrong.  This is held in  ALI V. CBN (supra) and also by the principle 
of ibi jus ibi remedium (where there is wrong, there must be remedy) see,  AMAECHI V. INEC 
(2008) 5 NWLR [1080] 227, ASHBY V WHITE (1703) 92 ER 126 among others.  
Based on the positions of law, the careful perusal of the duty in breach shows that it is a 
ministerial or administrative duty imposes on the defendant who is official of HRC by CoHRC . 

10 | P a g e  
 
It is saved to hold that the condition of demand -and-refusal will not apply in this instance case. 
Therefore, the contention of Defendant's Counsels in their PO is discountenanced with.  
It is important to state that Pre -action Notice is different from t he application for demand 
requires in relation to order of mandamus. The latter is used to notify Defendant that an action is 
likely to be or will be taken against him/her in court of law. See.  VISITOR, IMO STATE 
UNIVERSITY & ORS v. PROF. INNOCENT CHUKA OK ONKWO & ORS (2014) AELR 
3156 (CA), (CA/OW/263/2011). However, the principle of demand and refusal is a requirement 
of law which must be fulfilled not until there is statutory provision to that effect but Pre -action 
notice will only be issued when there is statutory provision for that. See NATIONAL AGENCY 
FOR FOOD AND DRUGS ADMINISTRATION AND CONTROL v. MR. EUGINE 
S.ONWUKA (2013) AELR 3002 (CA) [CA/K/128/2009]. 
Defendant also argued that claimant did not state the month in which the defendant had fallen 
short. I think this argument is watery. What I think the defendant should have done is to file a 
counter-affidavit to negate the assertion of the claimant that the said constitutional duty has been 
carried out. This may be a technical mechanism to cover up lik ely unconstitutionality and 
illegality that this case wants to correct. The affidavit has shown reasonable cause of action. 
Particularly, by paragraph 6 and 7 states thus; 
6. That at the time of bringing this case, the defendant has failed to publish the s tatement of 
account number of the chambers. 
7. That the failure of the defendant to publish the statement of account has made the members of 
the chambers unaware of the financial state of the chambers. 
This is enough to have instinct that there is livelihood of unconstitutionality underground. It is 
now left to defendant to rebut the allegation with fact and law that no illegality and 
unconstitutionality has taken place. Allowing the argument of Defendant of stating particular 
month is one that will  only lead to technicality. Courts have warned against technical justice at 
the expense of substantive justice. See  SENATOR (MRS.) EME UFOT EKAETE v. UNION 
BANK OF NIGERIA PLC (2014) AELR 4143 (CA) [suit no; CA/A/198/2010], Court of 
Appeal held as follows; 
“No Court administering law and equity will allow technical arguments to defeat the course of 
justice. Technical arguments to defeat the course of justice was rejected in G. B. Ollivant, Ltd. 
vs. C. A. Vanderpuye (1935) 2 WACA 368 when the Court held at page 370 that: "As to the 
second objection, the contention of the respondent appears to be correct, but it is of a purely 
technical nature, and this Court will not refuse to attempt to do substantial Justice between the 
parties upon a pure technicality..."   CENTRAL BANK OF NIGERIA v. OKEB NIGERIA 
LIMITED & ORS (2014) AELR 4191 (CA)[Suit No: CA/A/554/2013],  MTN NIGERIA 
COMMUNICATIONS LIMITED v. MRS TAIBATU BABAYODE (2014) AELR 4623 
(CA)[Suit No: CA/AK/18M/2013]. 

11 | P a g e  
 
This Honourable Court hereby holds that the c ondition precedent for instituting this case has 
been fulfilled. Also, there is reasonable cause of action to prosecute this case. As a result, this 
Honourable Court has requisite jurisdiction to entertain the case.  The P. O. is hereby 
discountenance with and same is dismissed for lack of merit. 
Having delivered ruling on the defendant preliminary objection on 23 rd day of April, 2019. This 
honourable court gave an order that defendant should file defence against next adjournment on 
25th day of April 2019 but the defendant did not comply with the other and defendant was also 
absent in court. Premised on this, claimant counsel moved an oral application for the court to 
give default judgement. This honourable court gave the following ruling on the said application. 
  
RULING ON APPLICATION FOR DEFAULT JUDGEMENT  
On the application for default judgement; it is sacrosanct that parties should be given adequate 
fair hearing in any proceeding for determination of right and liability. However, it is not the duty 
of the court to ensure that parties utilitse the opportunity behind fair hearing. The duty of the 
court is just to create an avenue for the opportunity to be used. SEE  ATUNDE AHMAD 
OLANREWAJU V. THE SPEAKER, LSS HOUSE OF REPS with suit no SUJ/003/17.  
However, where parties failed to used the opportunity, the court can proceed to enter default 
judgement if it is defendant that defaults OR treat the matter undefemded. But if it is claimant, 
the case will be struck out, see  BELLO v. INEC (201 0)8 NWLR [1196]324. Looking at the 
instances of this case, defendant‟s absence in court is happening for the first time in the history 
of the case. It is necessary to know what actually cause this absence, before any conclusion is 
made. This honourable cou rt considers giving the defendant another opportunity to defend her 
case and to actually know what cause their absence. 
Although, a justice delayed is justice is denied but justice rushed is justice crushed. Court must 
be wary of principle of natural justi ce and fair hearing at all necessary time. On the above, we 
hereby hold that this honourable court will give the defendant another opportunity to defend her 
case and the application for default judgement is discountenance with and same is rejected  
As a re sult of the defendant‟s absence in court, this honourable court ordered the defendant to 
file defence on 26th of April 2019. And an adjournment was made to 29th of April 2019. 
On the 29th of April 2019, defendant was represented by another counsel who urge d the court to 
adjourn till 30th of April, 2019, this was due to fact that he was just briefed. By this attitude, the 
defendant flaunted ordered of this court to file defence on the stipulated date for the second time. 
Court registered its displeasure in t he mind of every person present in court on that day. In the 
interest of justice, this honourable court in its immense magnanimity, granted the adjournment at 
the instance of the defendant again till 30th of April, 2019. 

12 | P a g e  
 
On 30th of April, 2019, defendant t ook her case serious time by filing defence. The defendant‟s 
was supported by 12 paragraph affidavit deposed to by the defendant before commissioner of 
Oath on 30 th of April, 2019. The defence was also supported by a comprehensive written 
address. Defendant adopted the two issues as it was couched by the claimant.  
It is necessary to start the analysis from the claimant;   
On the issue one, claimant contended that the word “shall” as used in art. 4 para. 4 of CoHRC 
means mandatory. This was premised on two stand points. 
i. That once SHALL is used in a statute, it literarily connotes mandatory and 
compulsory. 
ii. That the literal rule of interpretation is to be used in interpreting this particular 
provision of the constitution of Human Rights Chambers 2018. 
On the first standpoint, claimant argued that the word “shall” means mandatory and reliance was 
placed on FED. UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY AKURE & ANOR V. ASUU (2013) 
AELR 1435 CA, JIDE ALADEJOBI V. NBA (2013 AELR 2034 SC, IFEZUE V. 
MBADUGHA (1984) 1 S.C.N.L.R. 427 inter alia. Claimant submitted that the word means that 
a mandatory duty has been established for the defendant to perform.  
On the second standpoint, claimant argued that literal rule should be deployed in interpreting the 
provision of CoHRC. Claimant reli ed on the case of  NYESOME V. PETERSIDE (2016) 7 
NWLR [1512] 452, FALEKE V. INEC (2018) 18 NWLR [1543] 61 SC i nter alia. Claimant 
submitted that literal interpretation should be used to interpret art. 4 para 4 of CoHRC. 
On the issue two, claimant contended that rule of law is a cardinal principle which is premised 
inter alia, on the supremacy of law. Therefore, by virtue of the principle, the law must be 
followed at all time. He further contended that constitution is the supreme law in every society 
and its provisions have binding force on all authorities and persons throughout the society. The 
negative effect of this is that if the provisions of the constitution are wittingly and unwittingly 
breached, the victims like members of Human Right Chambers will suf fer injustice and 
dissatisfaction in the society and that will not only be bad but incurably bad. Reliance was placed 
on SUNDAY OLOYEDE V. THE STATE (2013) AELR 2946 (CA), ZAMFARA STATE 
HOUSE OF ASS. SERV. COMM. &ORS V. GOV. ZAMFARA ST & ORS (SUIT NO. 
CA/S/60/2013). 
Claimant submitted that the omission of the defendant is a slap on the rule of law and should be 
declared unconstitutional and urged the court to so hold. 
In the defendant‟s defence,   

13 | P a g e  
 
On issue one, defendant counsel contended that defendant had  not breached any constitutional 
provision because it is not all time that the word “shall” means mandatory.  The case of  
ABDULLAHI V. THE MILITARY ADMINISTRATOR & ORS (2009) 15 NWLR [1165] 
417 AND AMADI V. NNPC (2000) 10 NWLR [674] 76 is relied on. Defenda nt further 
contended that as it appears in this instant case, particularly referencing to paragraph 6 -11 of the 
defendant‟s counter affidavit, it would be understood that the defendant had tried and still trying 
all her best in order to comply with the con stitutional provision of Human Right Chambers 
constitution, particularly Art. 4 para.4.  it was further argued that careful perusal of this 
constitution, it is one thing for the defendant to try all her best possible in achieving the 
performance to defend and preserve the constitutional provisions of the chambers and it is other 
thing for the bank where the chambers have her account to respond accordingly to the request of 
the defendant for the observation of this provision in question. Defendant‟s counsel argued that if 
it is not for the intervention of provision of NEPA‟s bill, defendant will have carried out the 
duty. Reliance was further placed on  IFEZUE V. MBADUGHA (1984) 1 S.C.N.L.R. 427 inter 
alia. Counsel hereby submitted on the same argument and urged the court to so hold. 
On issue two; defendant counsel contended that defendant had not breach the said provision in 
contention taking in to consideration the effort that the defendant had put forward to perform the 
duty. It was further contended that it  is trite principle of law that law does not commands 
impossibility. The law does not compel a man to do that which is impossible. Reliance is placed 
on BULUNKUTU V. ZANGINA (1997) 11 NWLR [529] 526 @ 539 -540, where it is held that 
court should desist from  making orders in vain and not make orders that are impossible to be 
obeyed or implemented. Also, C.C.B. (NIG.) PLC. V. OKPALA (1997) 8 NWLR [518] 673 @ 
694 inter alia. It was further argued that when the obligation is one implied by the law, 
impossibility of the performance by the law affords good excuse. 
It was submitted that the defendant have not breached the provision of the chambers‟  
constitution and equally it is in law that a good excuse would avail a party after determination 
that the default is not on her part and the law does not command impossibility. 
In his reply on point of law on issue, claimant contended that SHALL will only mean permissive 
when its mandatory effect will lead to absurdity. He cited  Amadi v. NNPC (supra) and 
Bamidele Jamaldee n Oluwatomi V. Fin Sec. SU (suit no. SUJ/002/2018) where My Lord 
Emmanuel Geoffrey (as he then was) held that publishing of statement of account of the Union 
should not be left at the discretion of the Financial Secretary, this was also the opinion of Per 
Mustapha Olawoyin . He also cited Mustapha AbdulBasit Atoyebi v. SU president & Anor 
(SUJ/003/2018) It was submitted that SHALL cannot be permissive in this case. 
On the issue two, claimant stated that the maxim lex non cogit ad impossbilia  is only applicable 
to the order of court and not constitutional provision. This is because the circumstances that the 
maxim has been used are regarding order of court, he referred to  BULUNKUTU V. ZANGINA 
(supra) and all others cases cited by defendant‟s counsel. He further commended this honourable 

14 | P a g e  
 
court to the case of  Bamdele Jamaldeen V. Fin. Sec. SU  (supra) he quoted thus “what is the 
intention of the lawmaker? What do they hope to achieve? All these can be answered in two 
words TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUTABILITY to every member of the congress; it is the only 
way, member of the congress to know what the union is doing with the fund.” Claimant further 
stated that what is possible is what constitution has declared and impossibility is what the 
constitution sa ys it is impossibility. It was submitted that the provision of  art. 4 para. 4 of 
CoHRC is not impossible task. 
Having analysed the position of both parties, I proceed to give the following verdict. For proper 
and logical discussion, I adopted the two issues couched by the claimant. The issues are; 
1. Whether or Not the word “shall” as used in art. 4 paragraph 4 of the Constitution of 
human rights Chambers 2018 is to be construed as shall or permissive? 
2. Whether or not the defendant has breached the provision of  art. 4 para. 4 of the 
constitution of Human rights Chambers (CoHRC) 2018 and failed to in her duty to 
uphold the rule of law?  
On the first issue; it is grammatical implication that every word will have its true meaning only 
in the context it is used and the consequences of not abiding by the spirit of the word . It is a 
settled law that wherever and whenever the word "SHALL" is used. The general implication of 
such is that anything that results from there is an obligation and compulsive duty.  FEDERAL 
UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY, AKURE & ANOR V. ACADEMIC STAFF UNION 
OF UNIVERSITIES (ASUU) (CA) [Suit No: CA/AK/93/2011]; 
"The use and meaning of the word "shall" in a statute has been the subject of judicial attention in 
a number of cases of this Court and the Supr eme Court. In all those decisions the Courts have 
emphasized that in its ordinary meaning "shall" is a word of command which must be given an 
obligatory meaning as denoting compulsion and has the invaluable consequence of excluding the 
thought of discretio n of impose a duty which must be enforced. See  IFEZUE V. MBADUGHA 
(1984) 1 SCNLR 427 and ADAMS V. UMAR (2009) 5 NWLR (Pt. 1133) 41."  
In OMOPUPA v P.R.O 1, HUMAN RIGHTS CHAMBERS suit no. LSSJ/005/19, per 
Muhammed JLSS said; “The word „shall‟ when used in a statutory provision import anything 
must be done, it is a form of command or mandate, the use and meaning of the word “shall” in a 
statute has been the subject of judicial attention in number of cases of this court and appel late 
court (student union court) in all those decision the courts have emphasized that in its ordinary 
meaning „shall‟ is a word of command which must be given an obligatory meaning as denoting 
compulsion and has the invaluable consequence of excluding the  thought of discretion of impose 
a duty which must be enforced. I rely on the cases of  SOLIU HAFEEZ ISHOLA V THE 
SENATE PRESIDENT OF THE STUDENT UNION & ORS SUJ/O02/18-19” 

15 | P a g e  
 
However, there are instances where the word will be given another meaning, in  KAMBA v 
KAMBA (2005) 4 NWLR part 914. "... the word should be on a case by case basis; in this 
court's opinion that is why, "It is now trite that the word "shall" does not always mean "must" - a 
matter of compulsion. It could be interpreted, where the context so  admits as "may"; whereas 
"may" is also not always "may" "It may sometimes be equivalent to "shall".  
In the case of CHIEF FRANCIS UCHENNA UGWU & ORS V. PEOPLES DEMOCRATIC 
PARTY & ORS (Suit No: CA/E/259/2012) “that generally such mandatory terms, like "sha ll," 
"must" and the like, by reason of their mandatory nature demand and require that they must be 
complied with. Compliance with what they command cannot be waived. This point is so settled 
and elementary that it need not be dwelt on beyond what I have sa id. There are, however 
exceptions to this general rule as follows: - 1. Where the mandatory words are contained in the 
rules of procedure of a Court or prescribe rules of procedure of a Court and the demand of 
justice dictate a permissive application. 2. Wh ere other provisions of an enactment or a written 
document show that compliance with such mandatory words can be waived or that they should 
be applied permissively.” 
The provision of Article 4 paragraph 4 of CoHRC which read thus;   
That the financial secretary SHALL publish the statement of the account of the chambers at the 
end of each month. 
The examination of the said provision reveals that there is a duty to be performed but the bone of 
the contention is that, is the duty mandatory? At this junctur e, it is necessary to probe the 
intention of the drafter of such law. What will the drafter of the law be thinking at the time of 
drafting the law? What will the drafter envisage while drafting this law? What will the drafter 
seek to achieve for drafting t his law? The answers to these questions are not far -fetched. The 
drafter will be thinking, envisaging and seeking TRANSPARENCY, ACCOUNTABILITY, 
RESPONSIBILITY AND PROBITY. All these go to nothing but to prevent and curb 
CORRUPTION AND MISMANAGEMENT OF RESO URCES. See  JAMALDEEN 
OLUWATOMI V. FIN SEC. SU (SUIT NO. SUJ/002/2018), ABDULBASIT ATOYEBI V. 
SU PRESIDENT & ANOR (SUJ/003/2018).  
If all these are the motives for the birth of the provision in contention, the answer to the first 
question will be "YES, IT IS MANDATORY DUTY". Any other interpretation asides the above 
will travel against the intention of the drafter. The duty established does not lead to injustice, 
ambiguity or absurdity but rather it leads to equity, fairness and justice at all material time.  
Otherwise, for the duty to be left at the discretion of the financial secretary for performance at 
will, this kind of interpretation will promote dereliction of duty and corruption.  
It is also trite law that whenever the provision of the law is clear and  unambiguous, court should 
not become fashion designer to shape and design new clothe for the statute. This means that 
Statute should not be given another clothes so far its natural clothe does not portray irrationality 

16 | P a g e  
 
and injustice. All in all, literal i nterpretation should be resorted to where it does not lead to 
absurdity. ELELU-HABEEB V AG FED AND ORS (2012) 13 NWLR [1318] 423 SC , 
DASUKI AHMAD OLUWANISHOLA & ANOR V. HUMAN RIGHTS CHAMBERS  & 3 
ORS (suit no LSSJ/005/2018) 
Upon all these, this honourable  court holds that the word 'SHALL' contains  art. 4 para. 4 of 
CoHRC connotes, denotes and decodes MANDATORINESS, COMPULSION, AND 
OBLIGATION. The argument of the defendant counsel is hereby discountenanced with and the 
contention of the claimant Counsel is countenanced with and upheld. This issue is settled in 
favour of the claimant 
On Issue 2, it is necessary to ask this question who a financial secretary is? Financial Secretary is 
the office, official or officer in any institution, organisation, body, comp any and the like (in this 
case Chambers) saddles with periodic and sequential record of inflow and outflow of financial 
movement in the said associations. The office also engages in the estimation and calculation of 
any expense and perhaps finances budget of the said bodies or organisations. It is clear from the 
above that financial secretary is expected to have firsthand knowledge of the daily or periodic 
financial status of any body or organisation. The record of financial movement should be 
handled with extra-ordinary care due to its sensitivity. 
Defendant stated in the counter -affidavit that effort had been made to secure the statement of 
account from their Bank, although the name of the bank was not stated. This depicts that 
defendant does not have pers onal record of financial status of the chambers but rely solely on 
record of account in the bank. The provision does not mention "statement of bank account" but 
"statement of account". This means that the provision does not limit the statement of account t o 
bank account but statement of all forms of account. Had it been that defendant has personal 
record of account same should have been published in place of statement of bank account.  
Likewise, defendant makes an averment in counter -affidavit that she used  to pay a visit to the 
bank one week before the end of the month in order to make a request for the statement of 
account and that she had approached bank for the said statement of account in 7 th of April, 2019, 
all these were contained in paragraph 6 and 7  of Defendant's Counter -affidavit. Although, 
averment in affidavit is an evidence, see  LT. COL ABDULLAHI DAN' ASABE (RTD) & 
ANOR v. ALH. IBRAHIM BABALE (2013) AELR 3077 (CA) , Suit No: CA/K/62/2007 where 
court held thus; “ ...It is also the law that averme nt of facts in pleadings must be distinguished 
from facts deposed to in an affidavit in support of an application in Court. Whereas the former, 
except admitted by the opponent in his defence, constitutes no evidence, the latter are, by law, is 
evidence alr eady, which a Court may, in appropriate cases, act upon. See the case of  BAT 
(NIG,) LTD VS. INT'L TOBACCO CO. PLC (2013) 2 NWLR (Pt. 1339) 493 at 521; 
MAGNUSSON VS. KOIKI (1993) 9 NWLR (Pt. 317) 287” 

17 | P a g e  
 
The averments are not sufficient evidence for the court to believe that, because everyone can 
come before the court and make such statements. This kind of evidence needs to be buttressed 
with other evidence that will make court to believe same. It is the duty of any party before the 
court to supply overwhelming evidence for the court to make inference or conclusion in any case 
in his/her favour. see  SECTION 1 OF EVIDENCE ACT 2011, in the case of UFONDU 
OKWULEHIE & ANOR v. CHIEF OTUOCHERE OBASI (2014) AELR 5690 (CA) (Suit 
No: CA/OW/307/2011) it was held thus;  “ Now before arriving at a decision in any cause or 
matter, the duty to be performed by the parties and the Court are well defined by the Rules of the 
relevant Court. The parties have the burden to call credible evidence in support of their 
pleadings. The Court will thereafter assess and evaluate the pieces of evidence led along with the 
various submissions of Learned Counsel to the parties.”  This rule also applies to paraphrase 8, 
9, 10 and 11 of Defendant's Counter-affidavit. 
If at all, the averments in the  stated above paragraphs are true, the defendant ought to have been 
informing the members of Chambers about the situation and what has been preventing her to 
publish the said statement of bank account (assuming the provision is referring to the same). 
Perhaps, someone among the members may have helped to secure the Electricity Generating bill. 
Looking at the provision inwardly, it also has the objective of making members being availed of 
information on the financial status of the chambers. In that regard, f ailure to publish same will 
amount to the members‟ right to said information being breached. 
Defendant‟s Counsel contended that the performance of the said duty in question is impossible 
for the defendant to perform because of the inability to get the statement of account from bank. It 
true that lex non cogit as impossibilia , see  ADENIJI V. IFELODUN LOCAL 
GOVERNMENT & ORS (2018) LPELR -44050 CA. The principle is an equitable one; the 
defendant has not proved sufficient ground upon which this can be in her f avour because he who 
comes to equity must come with clean hand. Also, the duty in art. 4 para. 4 is not an 
impossibility considering the driving motives of such duty. 
 Claimant Counsel argued that the maxim  lex non cogit ad impossibilia  only apply to impossible 
order of court, in the case of A. G. LAGOS STATE V. ALI HASSAN (2016) NGCA 86, where 
Court of Appeal used the maxim to interpret a particular provision of Administration of Criminal 
Justice Law of Lagos State. The Maxim is actually used to whistle down any provision because it 
is difficult to comply with it. It is understood that the maxim is used for the interpretation of 
Statute or any documents apart from being equitable principle. It is used to relax the spirit of any 
law where strict compliance w ith such law will lead to injustice particularly, where a statute 
states the condition precedent that its performance or fulfillment is impossible. It is also used to 
caution court against making an impossible order. Therefore, it is a wrong contention tha t the 
maxim is only applicable to impossible court order.  

18 | P a g e  
 
It is hereby ripen to hold that defendant has breached  art. 4 para 4 of CoHRC without any just 
cause. The issue is settled in favour of the claimant. The contention of the defendant's Counsel is 
discountenanced with and rejected. 
However, this must be said, this Honourable  Court is disheartening with the attitude of the 
defendant and her counsels regarding orders of this court . It is not right on any person or 
authority to flaunt order of court. Court and its orders are meant to be obeyed.  Per Muhammed 
said in OMOPUPA V. PR O I OF HUMAN RIGHTS CHAMBERS (supra) that " As 
regarding flaunting the order of the court, I must state categorically that a court order comes to 
effect, from date of issuance or pronouncement, and it must be respected and obeyed. Court 
Orders or judgments are not permitted to be treated with arrogance and levity. An order made 
within jurisdiction is not invalid or nullity even if it is erroneous in fact or in law or even 
perverse. The option usually open to a person or persons to whom an order of Court is made and 
who is dissatisfied or aggrieved have their remedies on Appeal against the said order or simply 
apply to have the order set aside as the case maybe. To therefore disobey an order of the court 
under the misguided belief that the said order is null f or any reason whatsoever, even if 
subsequently turns out to be so in the end, would be to court active legal danger with all 
unpleasant consequences that this may subsequently attract. The danger axiomatic is contempt. I 
relied on the following cases LAWRENCE KANU & ANOR V. LAWRENCE OBETA & ORS 
reported in 2015 (SUIT NO: CA/OW/261/2012)OUGULEYE V. AINA (2012) 28 WRN 41; 
(2013) ALL FWLR (PT. 602) 1681; LABOUR PARTY V. INEC (2008) 35WRN 89; (2008) 
13NWLR (PT. 1103) 73; ODU V. JOLAOSO (2005) 16 NWLR (PT. 950) 178” 
It is right to put that any person or authority that flaunts court order is nothing but anti 
democracy and rule of law. Such act can cause chaos and disharmony in any society where such 
disobedience has occurred. The simply implication is that the person or authority does not have 
respect for constitution of our land. The spirit of constitutionalism in such a person or authority 
has died and same has been buried. Such kind of act should not exist and persist among human 
being but somewhere else. 
This honourable court hereby holds that defendant has breached art. 4 para 4 of CoHRC for her 
failure to publish the statement of account and all these are settled in favour of the claimant. 
THEREFORE, THIS HONOURABLE COURT MAKES THE FOLLOWING 
DECLARATIONS AND ORDER; 
 A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT THAT the word “shall” as used 
in art. 4 para 4 of CoHRC is of mandatory effect, compelling, mandatory and equally 
obligatory. 
 A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT THAT the defendant has failed 
to comply with the provision of art. 4 para 4 of CoHRC. 

19 | P a g e  
 
 A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT THAT the defendant has failed 
to uphold the Rule of law as a result of her non -compliance with the said constitutional 
provision. 
 AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT orders com pelling and mandating the 
defendant to perform her Constitutional duty imposes by the provision of art. 4 para 4 of 
CoHRC at the end of each month or the defendant shall furnish necessary information to 
the members regarding the account. 
 AN ORDER OF THIS H ONOURABLE COURT compelling and mandating the 
defendant to tender a written apology to the chambers at the next chamber meeting after 
the determination of this suit. 
All other orders not granted are refused. 
OPINION OF HON. JUDGE OLATOYINBO MUHAMMED; 
The matter was set in motion by an originating summon brought pursuant to  Order 2 Rule 2 of 
the Law Students‟  Society Court 2019. The claimant has called upon the court to determine 
two issues as couched below: 
1. Whether or not the word “shall” as used in Article 4 Paragraph 4 of the Constitution of 
Human Right Chambers 2018 is to be construed as mandatory or permissive. 
2. Whether or not the defendant has breached the provision of Article 4 Paragraph 4 of the 
Constitution of Human Right Chambers 2018 and failed in her duty to uphold the rule 
of law. 
Whereof the claimant prays the following;    
 A declaration of this honourable court that the word “shall “  as used in  Article 4 
paragraph 4 of the Constitution of Human Rights 2018 is of mandatory effect and 
is to be construed as compelling, mandatory and equally obligatory. 
 A declaration of this honourable court that the defendant has failed to comply with the 
provision of Article 4 paragraph 4 of the constitution of Human Rights Chambers 
2018. 
  A declaration of th is honourable court that the defendant has failed to uphold the rule 
of law as a result of her non-compliance with the said constitutional provision. 
 An order of this honourable court , compelling and mandating the defendant to 
perform her constitutional duty imposed by the provision of  Article 4 paragraph 4 of 
the Constitution of Human Right Chambers 2018 at the end of each month. 

20 | P a g e  
 
 An order of this honourable court compelling and mandating the defendant to tender a 
written apology o the chambers at the next  chambers meeting after the determination 
of this suit. 
 An order of this court mandating the defendant to pay a token of two thousand naira as 
the cost of litigation. 
 And further order(s) of declaration(s) as this honourable court may deem fit to make in 
the circumstance of this case. 
      On issue 1, the claimant argued and submitted that the word “shall” as used in  Article 4 
paragraph 4 of the chamber‟s constitution denotes compulsion and not permissive, the cited 
the case of  FEDERAL UNIVERSITY OF TECHNO LOGY AKURE AND ANOR VS 
ACADEMIC STAFF UNION OF UNINIVERSITIES ( 2013) AELR 1435 CA, JIDE 
ALADEJOBI VS NIGERIA BAR ASSOCIATION (2013) AELR 2034 SC, FOLARANMI 
VS ABRAHAM (2004) 10 NWLR (PT 881) 434 CA. They also further argued and submitted 
that when the words used in a statue are clear and unambiguous, they must be given their natural 
and ordinary meaning. They relied on FALEKE VS INEC (2016) 18 NWLR (Pt 1543) 61 S.C, 
NYESOME VS PETERSIDE (2016) 7 N.W.L.R (Pt. 1512) PJ. 452. 
     On issue 2, they contended and submitted that the defendant in her omission to uphold the 
provision of Article 4 paragraph 4 has breached the said provision and thus failed her duty to 
uphold the rule of law. They cited SUNDAY OLOYEDE VS THE STATE (2013) AELR 2946 
(CA), NUHU VS OGELE (2003) 18 NWLR [PT. 852] 251. 
    A preliminary objection was raised by the defendant and was dismissed by the court. 
 The defendant in their defence couched two issues for determination: 
1. Whether or not the word shall as used in Article 4 paragraph 4 of this Constitution 
of Human Rights Chambers 2018 is to be construed as mandatory or permissive. 
2. Whether or not the defendant had breached the provision of article 4 paragraph 4 of 
this Constitution and failed in her duty to uphold the rule of law. 
     Whereof the defendant prays the followings:  
 A declaration of this honourable court that the word  “shall “ as used in  Article 4 of 
HRC Constitution is of permissive rather than  construing it to be mandatory 
 A declaration of this honourable court that the defe ndant has not failed but he had 
complied with the constitutional provisions of HRC 
 An order of this honourable court that there is no breach whatsoever on the part of the 
financial secretary of HRC of University of Ilorin. 

21 | P a g e  
 
 An order of this court dismissing this suit in its entirety. 
 An order of this honourable  court mandating and compelling the claimant in this  suit 
to pay a sum of 500 naira to the defendant within 3 days after the determination of this 
suit. 
 And for such further order(s) or declaration ( s) as this honourable court may deem fit 
in the circumstances  
    On issue 1, the defendant‟s counsel contended that not all time will the draftsmen of the 
constitution used the word “shall” to connote compulsion, as it is also used to denote permissive. 
He cited  ABDULAHI VS THE MILITARY ADMINSTRATOR AND ORS (2009) 15 
NWLR, AMADI VS NNPC, KAMBA VS KAMBA (2005) 4 NWLR (Pt 914). He averred that 
the defendant would have carried out this constitutional obligation but was unable to because of 
generating Electricity bill. He therefore submitted that the word “shall” be construed as 
permissive. 
     On issue 2, he argued that defendant has not breached the provision of the constitution that 
community reading of her counter affidavit would reveal that her fa ilure to publish financial 
statement is not her fault but is from the bank. He further argued that the doctrine of  “Lex non 
cogit ad impossibilia (the law does not compel a man to do that which is impossible).  He cited 
the case of  BULUNKUTU VS ZANGINA (199 7)11 NWLR (Pt. 529) 526 {539 -540}, C.C.B 
(NIGERIA) PLC VS OKPALA (1997)8 NWLR (Pt. 518) 673 at 694 
He finally submitted that the defendant has not breached the provision of the constitution. 
HERE IS MY JUDGMENT:  
    Having painstakingly read through both parties‟ brief, it appeared to me they both couched the 
same issues for determination. I shall hit the nail on the head by adopting same for just 
determination of this suit. 
The issues as couched are:  
 Whether or not the word  “shall” as used as used in  Article 4 paragraph 4  of the 
constitution of Human Right Chamber2018 is to be construed as mandatory or 
permissive. 
 Whether or not the defendant has breached the provision of  Article 4 paragraph 4 of 
this constitution and failed in her duty to uphold the rule of law.  
       On issue one, it is a rudimentary principle of law that when  “shall” is used in the 
construction of a section or subsection, it imports into a compulsion or an obligation. This has 
been judicially amplified severally in abundance judicial decisions of this court and appellate 

22 | P a g e  
 
court. In DR NWANKWO AND ANOTHER V. ALHAJI UMARU YARADUA AND ORS 
(2010)LPELR 2109 SC [78] C -E, ADEKEYE JSC held: “....the word shall when used in a 
statutory provision import anything must be done. It is a for m of command or mandate. It is not 
permissive, it is mandatory. The word shall in its ordinary meaning is a word of command which 
is normally given a compulsory meaning as it is intended to denote obligation.”  :  TABIK 
INVESTMENT LTD AND ANOTHER VS GTB PLC  (2011) LPELR 3131., OMOPUPA 
MUHAMMED AWWAL VS PUBLIC RELATION OFFICER 1, HUMAN RIGHT 
CHAMBERS (Suit No: LSSJ/001/2019). 
It is apt to bring to the fore the provision of  Article 4 paragraph 4 of the constitution of HRC 
2018:  
   “That the financial secretary shall publish the statements account of the chambers at the end of 
each month”. 
 This provision is very clear and unambiguous. Thus, in this case the court need not travel into 
the voyage of discovery in its interpretation as it is a cardinal principle o f interpretation that 
words are to be given ordinary interpretation and effect most especially when the words used are 
straightforward and unambiguous. See LAWAL V. G.B OLIVIANT (1972) 3 SC 124. See also 
BASINCO MOTOR LTD VS WOMAN LINE AND ANOTHER( SUIT NO: SC.24/2003).  
Therefore I agree with the submissions of the plaintiff on this issue. However, this does not mean 
the word “shall” may not denote permissibility or directory.  In CENTRAL BANK OF 
NIGERIA  Vs OKEB NIGERIA LTD AND OTHERS. (2014) AELR 4191 CA.   The court 
held: It is now trite law that the word  “shall” does not always mean  “must”, a matter of 
compulsion. It could be interpreted where the context so admit as “may”, whereas “may” is also 
not always mean may , it may sometimes be equivalent as  “shall”. See also  KAMBA vs 
KAMBA (2005) 4 NWLR (Pt. 914). 
The apt question that must be answered here is how do we determine the intendment of the 
legislature in this circumstance or what do they seek to achieve, the answer to this would aid to 
know the suitable interpretation that should be given to “shall”.  
The answer to this is transparency and accountability. Transparency is a powerful force, that 
when consistently applied can help to fight corruption, improve governance and promote 
accountability. See  BAMIDELE JAMALDEEN OLUWATOMI VS FINANCIAL 
SECRETARY, STUDENTS‟ UNION (2018)USULR (Pt. 6)46. 
The chambers status of account should not be disclosed at the convenience of the defendant, but 
an incumbent task which she is bound to do as stated by the constitution. 
    Paragraph 9, 10, 11and 12 of the defendant‟s affidavit  

23 | P a g e  
 
    I commend the defendant‟s counsel for the research and industry, in citing the case of AMADI 
VS NNPC (2000) 10 NWLR (PT. 674) 76. While contending that “shall” should be used as 
may. However if he had taken pain in reading the case carefully, he would realized it is totally 
distinguishing from the present circumstance. But this court being a court of justice will briefly 
look into that case to determine whether such can be marry t o the fact of this case.  The issue in 
AMADI VS NNPC (SUPRA) is whether the requirement of  section 12(2) of NNPC Act has 
been met. The section is to the effect that a pre - action notice is to be issued to the corporation 
before being sued and this notice sh all contain the name, address and cause of action of the 
intending plaintiff, to enable the corporation make adequate preparation and should be served on 
them a month before suing. The notice was served on plaintiff as prescribed however particulars 
of the claim did not meet the requirement of the provision (i.e. It didn‟t container the name and 
address of the plaintiff but only the address of the legal practitioner) the court held that  “shall” 
in that case cannot be used to mean mandatory but rather permis sive or directory as the plaintiff 
being an ex -worker is already known to the corporation, thus, such technicality shouldn‟t be 
sacrificed on the altar of justice. To this effect the court cited  section 23 of the Interpretation 
Act which provides:  
         “ where a form is prescribed by an enactment, a form which differs from the prescribed 
form shall not be invalid for the purposes of the enactment by reason only of the difference if the 
difference is not in a material particular and is not calculated to mislead”. 
How is the interpretation of  “shall” given in that case to mean permissive be equate with this 
case where the intendment of the draftsmen is to achieve transparency and accountability? Thus, 
the suitable interpretation to be given to “shall” to achieve what lawmakers aim at is compulsory 
see BAMIDELE JAMALDEEN OLUWATOMI VS FINANCIAL 
SECRETARY,STUDENTS‟ UNION (SUPRA). To this end, I resolved this issue in favour of 
the plaintiff. 
On issue two, whether the defendant has breached the provision of Article 4 paragraph 4 of the 
Constitution of Human Right Chambers 2018 and failed in her duty to uphold the rule of law. 
Rule of law is the very anvil and foundation on which any society is anchored. It precedes 
society itself and predominates over the interest of any members of the society be he so high. See 
MILITARY GOVERNMENT OF LAGOS VS ODUMEGWU OJUKWU(2001) FWLR (pt. 
50)1979,1802.,  
Article 2 Paragraph 1 and 2 of the Human Right Chamber Constitution provides:  
   “This constitution is supreme and it s provision shall have binding force on all members and 
officers of the chamber at all time.” 

24 | P a g e  
 
   “If any directive or policy is inconsistent with any of the provision of this constitution, that 
other directive or policy shall be null and void to the extent  of its inconsistency and this 
constitution shall prevail”.  
           Before concluding on this resolution, I shall quickly move to  resolve on whether the 
doctrine of  lex non cogit ad impossibillia  will make the constitutional act imposed on the 
defendant be excusable and thus rending her act consistent with the rule of law. The maxim 
according to  black law dictionary 2 nd edition means: “the law does not compel 
impossibilities”. See BULUNKUTU VS. ZANGINA (1997) 11 NWLR (PT.529) 526 AT 539 
– 540. However for this maxim to apply, such impossibilities must be objective and not 
subjective. By objective, we mean a reasonable man acting reasonably would believe in the 
circumstance that carrying out such duty is impossible, but all the reasons adduced by the 
defendant lacks merit and cannot be considered. There is an equitable maxim which says: “he 
who come equity must come with clean hand”. See  ADEJUMO VS AYANTEGBE (1989) 3 
NWLR [110] 47, OILFIELD SUPPLY CENTRE LTD VS JOHNSON (1987)2 NWLR (58) 
625. Therefore equity will not aid her in this circumstance because her act is inexcusable. Thus, I 
hold that the doctrine of  lex non cogit ad impossibilia cannot be invoked in this circumstance.  
Therefore, her failure to publish the statement of account will amount to a breach of the 
constitutional duty she swore to protect . See ZAMFARA STATE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY 
SERVICE COMMISSION AND ORS VS GOVERNOR OF ZAMFA RA STATE (CA 
/S/60/2013) where the court held that the constitution is the supreme law of land. Any 
interpretation that is in a bid to excuse the recklessness of the executives impliedly amends the 
provision of constitution to justify the inexcusable and u njustifiable infringement of the 
constitution should not be adopted. 
 See also A.G OGUN STATE VS A.G FEDERATION (2002) 18 N.W.L.R (Pt. 798) 232.  
Therefore issue 2 is resolved against the defendant. 
The following orders are granted as prayed: prayer 1, 2, 3, 4 of the plaintiff, I make no order as 
to cost. 
OPINION OF HON. JUDGE TUNJI-LAWAL LAWAL BOLAJI, JLSS 
The history and analysis of facts of this case contained in the lead judgement are hereby adopted.  
In laying the swords of law crossed by both parties to this suit to rest, the two issues couched by 
the claimant shall be adopted as they are satisfactory enough for the fair determination of this 
suit. These issues are: 
1. Whether or not the word 'shall' as used in  Article 4(4), Human Right Chambers 
Constitution, 2018 is to be construed as mandatory or permissive. 

25 | P a g e  
 
2. Whether or not the defendant has breached the provision of  Article 4(4), HRC 
constitution, 2018 and failed in her duty to uphold the rule of law 
On the fi rst issue which bothers on whether the word  “shall” as contained in the provisions of  
Article 4(4) HRC CONSTITUTION, 2018 is to be construed as mandatory or permissive. The 
word “shall” is a notorious word in the uncomplicated world of legal interpretation  perhaps, 
because of its consistent use by the lawmakers. As a notorious word, it has always been subject 
of judicial treatment within and outside this jurisdiction. The word without any iota of 
glorification is in its being a catalyst of an obligation whi ch excludes the thought of discretion 
when it imposes a duty. Undoubtedly, it confers in its interpretation a great indiscretion on any 
interpreter be he so high. See OMOPUPA v P.R.O. 1 HUMAN RIGHTS CHAMBERS (2018) 
LCELR 1819 -001; SOLIHU HAFEEZ ISHOLA v TH E SENATE PRESIDENT, SU 
(SUJ/002/18-19).  
Needless could it not be that the law is trite notwithstanding the power of “shall” to confer 
compulsion on any person or authority, it may be robbed of its obligatory force where it would 
be permissive depending on the context in which it appears. Even, the principle is also applicable 
to the word “May” as ordinarily, it is not mandatory but it can acquire a mandatory meaning 
from the context in which it is used. See  MADAM AKON IYOHO v EFFIONG & ANOR 
(2007) 11 NWLR (Pt 1044) 31. This thus, demonstrates that whether the word “shall” is of 
mandatory/permissive/directory effect, the context in which the word appears is the controlling 
factor. See I.C.A.N v ATTORNEY GENERAL OF THE FEDERATION (2004) 3 NWLR 
(Pt 859) 186. Although, none of the parties in their respective written addresses pleaded the 
context to which the word “shall” in the provision under consideration appears to support his 
case, it however becomes consequential to visit the provisions of  Article 4(4) of H RC 
CONSTITUTION, 2018. The section provides that: 
“That the Financial -Secretary shall publish the statement of account of the chambers at the end 
of each month” 
It is a settled law that interpretation of the Constitution must be purposive and not otherwise . 
This position of law has been rightly elucidated and enunciated in the words of Bello J.S.C (as he 
then was and of blessed memory) in  ATT.-GEN OGUN STATE v ABERUAGBA & ORS 
(1985) 1 NWLR (Pt. 3) 395/414 quoting himself in  IFEZUE v MBADUGHA (1984) 5 S.C. 
79/101 where he said: “The fundamental principles is that such interpretation as would serve the 
interest of the Constitution and would best carry out its object and purpose should be preferred. 
To achieve this goal, its relevant provisions must be read together and not disjointly.” 
Furthermore, it is not but the paramount law that where the word “shall” is used in the context 
where it directs the doing of a thing for the sake of Justice or the public good, it connotes 
compulsion. Factually, this swords of l aw also beheads the ordinary meaning of “May” and 
hence allows it to be interpreted as “shall" where it directs the doing of a thing for the sake of 

26 | P a g e  
 
Justice or public good. See DINGI MOHAMMED v THE STATE Appeal No: SC: 403/2015; 
CORON v MORREIL (1992) 2 K. B 180 @ 183 -184 Following the adduced positions of the 
law by considering the relevant whole of  Article 4(4) HRC CONSTITUTION it appears to me 
that the Article deals with Fundamental Objectives and Guiding Principle of the chamber. As 
such, the provisions of this Article are for the benefit of all the members of HRC which could at 
best be regarded as public good.  
Therefore, it is my opinion on this issue that the word „shall‟ as used in  Article 4(4) HRC 
CONSTITUTION, 2018 is to be construed as mandatory and I hereby hold. I shall also state 
that the word  „shall‟ would have been directory and permissive in that context had it been the 
provision includes the avenue through which the statement of account should be published as in 
this regard, substantial adh erence is the only requirement. See  AMADI v NNPC (2000) 10 
NWLR (Pt 674) 76 
I shall now proceed to the second issue which has to do with whether or not the defendant has 
breached the provision of Article 4(4) HRC CONSTITUTION, 2018 and failed in her duty t o 
uphold the rule of law. Rule of law is a constitutional concept which stipulates that everything 
must be done in accordance with the law. In other words, it postulates that law must be the 
umbrella path that actions of persons and authorities must thread  without any deviation. See  
GOVERNOR OF LAGOS STATE v OJUKWU. That rule of law is upheld in this case would 
yield nothing but that the statement of account of HRC is being published by the defendant at the 
end of every month and if otherwise, it is a grave  breach of the HRC CONSTITUTION and a 
grievous injury to the rule of law. It appears to me through the uncontroverted averment of the 
claimant contained in Paragraph 6 of his affidavit that the defendant had failed to uphold the rule 
of law. Furthermore, t here's nowhere in the affidavit deposed to by the defendant that she 
published any statement of account. Rather, she only averred the reasons for her failure to 
publish the statement of account through Paragraph 6 -9 of the said affidavit. This prima facie 
points her 10 fingers to the fact that she had failed to perform her duty as required by the law. 
Premised upon the above, it's my opinion that the defendant has breached the provision of  
Article 4(4) HRC CONSTITUTION, 2018 and failed in her duty to uphold  the rule of law and 
I do hold. 
Let me drive with great convenience my pen of adjudication towards the submission of the 
defendant's counsel on the issue raised as to the applicability of the Maxim  „lex non cogit ad 
impossibilia‟ to this case. The Maxim means “The law does not compel to impossible ends". 
The truism cannot be denied that the court in making orders should desist from making orders in 
vain and not make an order that are impossible to be obeyed or implemented. See  
BULUNKUTU v ZANGINA (1997) 11 NWLR (Pt 529) 526 @ 529 -540. It follows therefore 
that for the applicability of this rule, the party invoking it must show in clear terms how the 
particular law or order is impossible to be obeyed or executed . The defendant in this case has 
however not ple aded in their defence any „how‟ or „way‟ through which it's impossible for the 

27 | P a g e  
 
defendant to carry out her duty as required by law. It is therefore my view that the principle of 
lex non cogit ad impossibilia does not apply to this matter. 
Premised upon the my reasons above, Orders 1,2,3,4,5 of the claimants are hereby granted. All 
other orders sought in this case are hereby refused. 
APPEARANCES 
A. S. Dagbo with A. P. Ganiyu_______________________________ Claimant's Counsel 
Isiaka Azeez with M. B. Abdulyekeen , T. M. Tanko & R. O. Aiyelabegan_____Defendant's 
Counsel 
Amici Curiae 
1. A. B. AbdulRaheem 
2. M. R. Al-mubarak 
3. W. O. Taofeeq 
4. Q. A. Adedimeji 
5. D. R. Sarumi 
6. J. O. Bayeshia 
7. A. A. Akintola 
8. A. A. Shomope 
9. M. A. Yahyah 
10. A. O. Salam 
 
LAW REPORT EDITED BY: 
1. KHADEEJAH ISMAIL 
2. ESERE PRECIOUS  
3. OKWARA LAWRENCE  
 
 
  

28 | P a g e  
 
 
 
  

29 | P a g e  
 
 