IN THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN HOLDEN AT UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN SUIT NO SUC/UIL/JC/OJ/0013/24-25 CITATION: (2025) 6 USLR
BEFORE THEIR LORDSHIPS:
TOHEEB ABDULSAMOD OBASANJO, SENIOR JUSTICE OF STUDENTS’ UNION COURT
(PRESIDING JUSTICE)
ASHIMI SAOBAN ADEDAYO, JUSTICE OF STUDENTS’ UNION COURT OMOTAYO SAMUEL, JUSTICE OF STUDENTS’ UNION COURT.
BETWEEN
FATOYE OBAFEMI DAVID..................................................... CLAIMANT AND
1. SENATE CLERK OF THE STUDENTS' UNION,
2. SENATE COUNCIL, UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN.......................DEFENDANT.
RATIO DECIDENDI
The grounds for preliminary objection is not limited only to the jurisdictional competence of the court. It extends to question of Res-Judicata, Limitation of time, Violation of provisions of law, Admissibility of evidence, Misjoinder of parties among other grounds.
NOTABLE HOLDINGS
ON MEANING OF DOCUMENT
A document is an instrument on which is recorded information or facts. It contains statement. It is any physical embodiment of information or ideas such as letter, contract, receipt, a book of account. -PER TOHEEB ABDULSAMOD OBASANJO, JSU
ON ADMISSIBILITY OF COMPUTER GENERATED EVIDENCE
computer-generated document, such as the Claimant’s screenshot of the conversation with the Defendant in this instant case, could only be admissible in evidence upon compliance with the requirements of section 84 of the Evidence Act. -PER TOHEEB ABDULSAMOD OBASANJO, JSU
50
ON ADMISSIBILITY WHICH REQUIRES COMPLIANCE WITH SECTION 84(4);
To admit computer-generated evidence (like screenshots), the party must either:provide oral evidence under Section 84(1), or produce a certificate of compliance under Section 84(4).Failure to comply renders such evidence inadmissible. PER HON. JUSTICE ASHIMI SAOBAN ADEDAYO.
ON ATTACHMENTS TO AFFIDAVITS STILL NEED CERTIFICATION
Even when computer-generated documents are attached to affidavits, they still require compliance with Section 84. Merely attaching them does not exempt them from the law. PER HON. JUSTICE ASHIMI SAOBAN ADEDAYO.
ON PURPOSE OF PRELIMINARY OBJECTION
The purpose of a preliminary objection is to terminate proceedings at the earliest stage if there is a legal defect, such as inadmissible evidence, lack of jurisdiction, or other procedural defects. PER HON. JUSTICE ASHIMI SAOBAN ADEDAYO.
COURT RULING ON THE PRELIMINARY OBJECTION RAISED BY THE DEFENDANT IN THIS SUIT DELIVERED BY HON. JUSTICE ASHIMI SAOBAN ADEDAYO
The first hearing of this case was held on Monday, 12th May, 2025 where the claimant in this suit filed a case vide a Writ of Mandamus against the sole defendant. The Writ was accompanied with a 12-paragraph affidavit deposed to by Obafemi Fatoye, a written address wherein a sole issue was couched for determination alongside screenshots of a conversation held via WhatsApp.
The Defendant filed his preliminary objection on and adopted same on Monday, 12th May, 2025 while the Claimant gave a reply to the preliminary objection on Tuesday, 13th May, 2025. Upon a careful perusal of the preliminary objection of the defendant in this instant suit, the two issues raised by the defendant border on admissibility of the screenshots tendered by the Claimant and the discharge of the burden of proof on him. For the determination of this preliminary objection, this court will resonate with the Claimant’s first issue:
WHETHER OR NOT THE SCREENSHOTS TENDERED BY THE CLAIMANT ARE INADMISSIBLE BY VIRTUE OF SECTION 84 OF THE EVIDENCE ACT, 2011.
RESOLUTION OF THE COURT ON THE SOLE ISSUE
Preliminary objection as posited in NEPA v. Isieveore must always be founded in law. The Supreme Court posited in Sani v. O.L.G.T.G. (2008) 12 NWLR (Pt. 1102) 691 preliminary objection is an objection which is initiated or commenced at the earliest opportunity where a party fails to comply with an enabling law or the rules of court. See also Mohammed v. Olawunmi (1993) 4 NWLR (Pt.288) 384; Oloriode v. Oyebi (1984) 1 SCNLR 390. The purpose of a preliminary objection to the hearing of a suit is to terminate the suit in limine for incompetence, thereby robbing the court of jurisdiction to entertain it.
 51

In the case of Tsokwa v. Ibi (2017) 10 NWLR (Pt. 1574) 343 on the meaning of preliminary objection, the court stated that a preliminary objection in a case before an international tribunal is an objection that, if upheld, would render further proceedings before the tribunal impossible or unnecessary. An objection to the court's jurisdiction is an example of a preliminary objection. What is preliminary is defined as coming before and usually leading up to the main part of something. A party that wishes to raise premminary objections must give nouce to that effect. Among other things, the notice of preliminary objections must contain grounds for objection and prayers to the court. When the preliminary objection is raised, the court will set suspend the current action to rule on the preliminary objection.
One important point that is unmistakable beyond all certainty is that the grounds for preliminary objection is not limited only to the jurisdictional competence of the court. It extends to question of Res-Judicata, Limitation of time, Violation of provisions of law, Admissibility of evidence, Misjoinder of parties among other grounds.
Preliminary objection can be raised in civil cases like this instant case for anything that contravenes the law. More importantly, I must establish emphatically that the grounds of divorce which the court has put into consideration as the grounds of the Preliminary Objection are Violation of provisions of law and Admissibility of evidence taking into cognizance the provision of Section 84(4) of the Evidence Act 2011.
The Defendant firmly contended that the Screenshots tendered by the Claimant are inadmissible by virtue of Section 84 of the Evidence Act 2011. In reply to this, the Claimant argued that the screenshot of a chat does not constitute a document, that section 84 of the Evidence Act applies to only documentary evidence generated by a computer and that documents attached to an affidavit do not need to comply with the clear wordings of section 84 of the Evidence Act.
Before going in-depth, it is sacrosanct to establish that a document is an instrument on which is recorded information or facts. It contains statement. It is any physical embodiment of information or ideas such as letter, contract, receipt, a book of account
In Dickson v. Sylva (2017) 8 NWLR (Pt. 1567) 167 Per NGWUTA, J.S C, it was held that an object, in so far as it is used to record and store information is a document and the information therein contained is a statement within the intendment of section 84 of the Evidence Act.
It is transparent beyond the slightest ambiguity that the screenshots of the conversation attached with the Claimant’s Writ of Mandamus is a document which not only carries an information but has same recorded on it for future use i.e tendering it as evidence in a suit like this. If the screenshots in question were never documents, I believe the Claimant ordinarily wouldn’t have present such as evidence in court to substantiate his claim.
To be frank, the Claimant’s position that the screenshot of a chat and conversation between two people is not a document in the sense that it wasn't used to store, record or review any form of information as no information was inputted into it is just a mere fallacy which lacks legal credence and this court can’t help but dishonour dishonourably.
Furthermore, the main issue in contention is as regards the admissibility of a computer-generated evidence which is not accompanied with a certificate of authenticationl. In Omisore v. Aregbesola (2015) 15 NWLR (Pt. 1482) 205, the position of the Supreme Court is clear as the Court held that it is not only internet-generated documents that are caught by the admissibility
52

requirements of section 84 of the Evidence Act, 2011. The phrase “a statement contained in a document produced by the computer” is used in section 84(1) of the Act. In section 258(1) of the Act, the Act defines “computer” to mean any device for storing and processing information, and any reference to information being derived from other information is a reference to its being derived from it by calculation, comparison or any other process. Therefore, a computer-generated document, such as the Claimant’s screenshot of the conversation with the Defendant in this instant case, could only be admissible in evidence upon compliance with the requirements of section 84 of the Evidence Act. See also Kubor v. Dickson(2013) 4 NWLR (Pt. 1345) 534.
In Onuoha v. Ubah (2019) 15 NWLR (Pt. 1694) 1, the court held that by virtue ofsection 84(4) of the Evidence Act, in any proceeding where it is desired to give a statement in evidence by virtue of the section a certificate- identifying the document containing the statement and describing the manner in (a) which it was produced; giving such particulars of any device involved in the production of that document as may be appropriate for the purpose of showing that the document was produced (b) by a computer; (c) dealing with any of the matters to which the conditions mentioned in subsection above relate, and purporting to be signed by a person occupying a responsible position in relation to the operation of the relevant device or the management of the relevant activities, as the case may be, shall be evidence of the matter stated in the certificate, and for the purpose of this subsection it shall be sufficient for a matter to be stated to the best of the knowledge and belief of the person.
It is sacrosant to further emphasise on the methods of proving a computer generated evidence in court. The Court of Appeal in Multichoice (Nig.) Ltd. v. M.C.S.N, Ltd.Gte. (2020) 13 NWLR (Pt. 1742) 415 held that Section 84 of the Evidence Act, 2011 consecrates two methods of proof of computer generated document either by oral evidence under section 84(1) and or by a certificate under section 84(4). In either case, the conditions stipulated in section 84(2) must be satisfied. The rationale for the satisfaction of the requirements of the sacred provision is to ensure the authenticity of the document and the integrity of the procedure used tobring it into being.
On the purport of Section 84(4) of the Evidence Act, 2011, the provision of the law in question is all about ascertaining the authenticity of the device from which the document was produced. The opportunity of proving the computer generated document by oral evidence, beyond the slightest ambiguity, has been defeated by the Preliminary Objection which came at the earliest opportunity for the defendant in this instant case. Assuming but not conceding the fact that the case had succeeded to the substantive suit, the Defendant may, after observing the Claimant’s process, object to the admissibility of the document which I believe in response, the Claimant will leverage on the other one - proving the document by oral evidence.
Through the lens of hindsight, it is inferrable that the purpose of this preliminary objection is to foreclose further hearing of this instant suit.The court posited in Ebebi v. Ozobo (2022) 1 NWLR (Pt. 1810) 165 that where a party raises preliminary objection to the hearing of a suit or a motion, it is a challenge to the competence of the court to entertain the process in question and the primary objective is to terminate the proceedings at the stage of the objection raised. The aim or essence of a preliminary objection is to terminate at infancy or as it were, to nip it at the bud, without dissipating unnecessary energy in considering an unworthy or fruitless matter in a court’s proceedings. In other words, it forecloses hearing of the matter in order to save time.
53

Similarly, in Nwaizu v. Toronto Hospital Ltd (2016) 15 NWLR (Pt. 1534) 165, it was held that a notice of preliminary objection deals with the general competence of the appeal. Where it succeeds, there is no need for the court to go further to consider the arguments in respect of the issues formulated for determination by the appellant. This is why the preliminary objectionis considered first before determination of the appeal on merit. See also BOSIEC v. Kachala (2006) 1 NWLR (Pt.962) 587; Omotosho v. Ifeh North Local Govt. (2010) All FWLR (Pt. 544) 12; Kente v. Ishaku (2017) 15 NWLR (Pt. 1587) 94; Yaro v. Arewa Const. Ltd. ((2007) 17 NWLR (Pt. 1063) 333; Efet v. INEC (2011) 7 NWLR (Pt. 1247) 423.
In retrospect, the purpose of a preliminary objection to the hearing of a suit is to terminate the suit in limine for incompetence, thereby robbing the court of jurisdiction to entertain it.Drawing all threads together, this honourable court hereby discontinues the admissibility of the screenshots due to the Claimant's non-compliance with Section 84(4) of the Evidence Act. Given that the violation of a statute and admissibility of evidence are the grounds for this Preliminary Objection, this suit is struck out. No order is made as to costs.
APPEARANCES:
FOR THE CLAIMANT:
A. E. AYEGBAYO (Lead Counsel) A. E. OLOMU
A. I. ALABI
FOR THE DEFENDANT:
P. C. ESERE, SAU, AGSU (Lead Counsel) A. S. NURUDEEN
