1 |  P a g e
 
 
GBADEBO LATEEFAH MORENIKEJI & ANOR V THE 
EXECUTIVE COUNCIL, L.S.S. 
CITATION: (2020) LCELR 2020006 
In the Law Students’ Society Court Of Unilorin 
ON THE 14TH OF JANUARY, 2019 
Suit No: LSSJ/006/2020 
Before Their Lordships: 
Hon. Judge AbdulkareemAbdurrazzaq Ketu CJLSS 
Hon. Judge AbdulRaheem Ali Opeyemi JLSS, 
Hon. Judge Jamiu Ridwan Adeniyi JLSS 
BETWEEN 
GBADEBO LATEEFAH MORENIKEJI  
AGBOOLA ABDULHAFEEZ OLAITAN 
Claimants 
AND      
EXECUTIVE COUNCIL, LSS  
Defendant 

2 |  P a g e
 
 
RATIO DECIDENDI 
1. CONSTITUTION LAW  - MEMBERSHIP OF LAW STUDENTS SOCIETY : The 
careful perusal of sections 5 and 6 of LSS constitution reveals that the sections 
contemplate th e situation where a member would have been admitted but not 
matriculated. In such situation, the person will still entitle to enjoy rights available to 
matriculated student. If it is otherwise, there is no need of using admitted and 
matriculated when matriculated can work for both expression. See the case of ONIKEKE 
& ORS V. LIBERTY CHAMBER  supra where it was held that Matriculated student that 
has to go process that starts with admission and ends with matriculation ceremony. 
Impliedly, nobody can be matricul ated without firstly being admitted. As such, the 
section should have merely used “matriculated” rather than “admitted and matriculated” 
as it is contained in Section of 5 and 6 of LSS constitution.  Per 
AbdulkareemAbdurrazzaq Ketu CJLSS 
2. INTERPRETATION OF STATUTE/C ONSTITUTION - HOLISTIC 
INTERPRETATION: In the same vein, it is  a notorious principle of law that 
statute/constitution should n ot be interpreted in isolation and that holistic interpretation 
should be deployed to  arrive at the intention of the law maker. see the case DASUKI 
AHMAD & ANOR V. HUMAN RIGHTS CHAMBERS & 3 ORS(2019) 1 LSSCLR 
1. Per AbdulkareemAbdurrazzaq Ketu CJLSS 
3. PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE  - ON WHAT CONSTITUTES A 
CONSOLIDATED CASE: In any situation where there are two or more cases in which 
there are same questions of law and fact, or the cause of the action arises from the same 

3 |  P a g e
 
point of action and situation, the case should be consolidated but not to subsume the case 
to one but to try the cases together for easy of proceeding and expedient dispensation of 
justice. The cases should be adjudged separately and differently because those cases st ill 
maintain their distinct and separate entity. Per AbdulkareemAbdurrazzaq Ketu CJLSS 
 
RULING ON DEFENDANT PRELIMINARY OBJECTION IN RESPONSE TO THE 
CLAIMANTS ORIGINATING SUMMON 
On the 10 th of December, 2019, the case of IBRAHIM SUCCESS F. V. EXECUTIVE 
COUNCIL with suit number LSSJ/005/2020 was filed. While this case was pending for 
enlistment, another case of the same question of law and fact was filed at the court registry on 
18th of Decem ber 2019, with the title GBADEBO LATEEFAH MORENIKEJI & 
AGBOOLA ABDULHAFEEZ OLAITAN V. EXECUTIVE, SUIT NO LSSJ/006/2020. Both 
cases were slated for 6 th of Jan. 2020. At the hearing, court raised an issued suomotu and invited 
the parties to address it whethe r or not the suits can be consolidated. The position of all parties 
was that the case can be consolidated because there are same questions in the two cases. The 
cases of HUMMEL V. IFEDIORA (2000) FWLR PT 61 @ 176, KURANGA & ORS V. 
GEORGE & ORS (2015) AELR 9318, ILAOBAJI V. EBIBU  (2000) 8 NWLR [668] 197  
inter alia were cited. The court ruled that “In any situation where there are two or more cases in 
which there are same questions of law and fact, or the cause of the action arises from the same 
point of action and situation, the case should be consolidated but not to subsume the case to one 
but to try the cases together for easy of proceeding and expedient dispensation of justice. The 
cases should be adjudged separately and differently because those cases st ill maintain their 
distinct and separate entity. See the cases of MARK OBEINYIRI & ORS V. CHIEF NWOSU 

4 |  P a g e
 
(2014) AELR 3947, EKUAGBALA V. IKWUIKWEME (2003) 19 NWLR [1226] 54 . In this 
instance case, the cases bothers on the same question of fact and law on assig ning fresh students 
into chambers without giving them option to choose which chamber to go. The cases question the 
constitutional authority of the Executive council of LSS to carry out this function. Also, the 
defendant in both cases is the same party. In that regard, this honourable court hereby held that 
these cases can be consolidated for hearing and they are consolidated. Thereafter, a motion was 
moved by claimants counsel to adopt their process as filed before the court but objection was 
raised by defe ndant counsel to the motion for adoption on the ground that the affidavits of 
claimants were altered and there was no prima facie evidence of those affidavits being resworn 
as it is required by section 118 of Evidence Act 2011 . Counsel to claimants replied  that the 
section would only apply to affidavit that had been sworn before it was altered but in their own 
case, the alteration was done before it was sworn at the court registry. The court aligned itself 
with position of claimants and held that the sectio n of EA only applies to already sworn affidavit 
and not affidavit that has been altered before sworn. The objection is discountenanced with and 
dismissed. 
On the 9th of Jan. 2020, defendant filed a Preliminary Objection (PO) on the grounds; 
a. That the claimants lack locus standi to institute this matter before this honourable 
court. 
An issue was couched that Whether or not the claimants in this case, have locus standi to 
institute the matter before this honourable court? The issue was addressed within t wo 
standpoints that the claimants lack locus standi to pursue this matter and that the court thereby 
lacks the jurisdictional competence to hear this matter. On the first standpoint, it was contended 
vehemently that the claimants in this instant case lack the locus standi to pursue this matter. The 

5 |  P a g e
 
case of Adesanya v. The President, Federal Republic of Nigeria (1981) 5 SC 112 was cited. It 
was further argued that only member of the society of the society can have locus standi to 
institute action in any aggr ieved situation in line with section 7(3) of LSS constitution  and that 
membership in the society is to one who has been duly admitted and matriculated with reliance 
on section 5 of LSS constitution . Reference was also made to page 27 of faculty of law 
students’ handbook (undergraduate) define matriculation process of the university and The 
case of Onikeke Musa &Ors v. Liberty Chambers (suit no. LSSJ/009/19) where Muhammed 
JLSS enunciated the features of matriculated student s as being admitted and matriculated . The 
court was urged to deployed literal rule of interpretation to interpret the provisions. It was 
contended that claimants were not matriculated members of the society. It was submitted on this 
standpoint that the claimants lack the locus standi to purs ue this matter before this honourable 
court. The followings were prayed for; 
1. AN ORDER OF THIS HONORABLE COURT DISMISSING this suit in its entirety 
2. AN ORDER OF THIS HONORABLE COURT  mandating the claimant to pay a sum 
of Five hundred Naira (500) only to the defendant, within three days of the 
determination of this preliminary objection as the cost of this litigation.  
3. AND FOR SUCH FURTHER ORDER(S) AS THIS HONORABLE COURT MAY 
DEEM FIT TO MAKE IN THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THIS CASE. 
The claimant in the case of Ibrah im Success F. V. Executive Council couched sole issue for in 
his reply to Preliminary Objection. The issue is whether or not the claimants in this case, have 
locus standi to institute the matter before the Honourable court? The contention on the issue is 
based on two stand point that the claimant is a member of the society and that the defendant 
cannot be approbate and reprobate. On the first stand point, it was argued that laws should be 

6 |  P a g e
 
interpreted holistically, the case of ALH. UMAR ABBA TUKUR V. GOV. OF  GONGOLA 
STATE (1989) LPELR -SC 196/87 was cited. It was further argued that by implication section 
43 of LSS constitution contemplated claimant as the member of the society. It was submitted that 
LSS constitution should be read as a whole and that claimant is this case is a member of the 
society. On the second standpoint, it was contended that the law does not allow approbation and 
reprobation by the same person on the same matter at the same time. The  cases of OTUNBA 
FATAI SAWEMIMO V. OTUNBA DAYO AWOBAJO & ORS (1999) LPELR, BABA -
PANYA V. PRESIDENT FRN (2018)  were cited. It was argued that defendant had considered 
the claimant as member while they were assigned to various chambers. It was submitted that  
defendant cannot blow hot and cold, approbate and reprobate at the same time.  It was wholly 
submitted that claimant has locus standi to institute this case. 
In the other case between Gbadebo Lateefah Morenikeji &Agboola AbdulHafeez Olaitan V 
Executive, t hey jointly reply to the PO while couching three issues; that whether or not the 
claimants have locus standi in this instance case? Whether or not the defendant has acted 
equiably within the purview of the law? Whether or not the court has jurisdiction to entertain this 
case? The first issue is based on two stand point that locus standi entails sufficient interest to 
institute a matter and that liberal approach to locus standi is applicable in constitutional matters. 
It was contended that locus standi is th e sufficient interest that a person has to institute an action 
before any court of competent jurisdiction. The case of ADESANYA V. PRESIDENT OF FRN 
(1981) LPELR-SC 1/1981 was cited among other cases. It was submitted that locus standi is a 
legal standing in law which is vested in claimant. It was contended and submitted on the second 
stand point that liberal approach is applicable to locus in constitutional matters. The case of 
SESAN V. LSS JUDICIARY  was cited. Claimants argued on issue 2 that defendant has  not 

7 |  P a g e
 
acted equitably within the purview of the law. It was further contended that he who comes to 
equity must come with clean hand. The case of TSA INDUSTRIES V. KEMA INV. LTD. 
(2006) VOL. 3 MJSC 1  was cited. it was contended on this position of the law th at defendant 
cannot be switching on and off the law to his benefit when defendant has exercise power on the 
claimant to assign them into chamber as a member of the society, he cannot be allowed to deny 
the membership of those students thereafter. It was su bmitted that defendant has acted 
inequitably within the purview of the law to deny the locus standi of the claimant while 
contending that they are not member of the society. It was argued and submitted that this 
honourable court has jurisdiction to enterta in the case of the claimants because it falls with the 
jurisdictional competency of the court. The case of MADINKOLU V. NKEMDILIM  was 
referred to. The followings were prayed for; 
1. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the claimants have 
requisite locus standi to institute this matter. 
2. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that this court has the 
sufficient jurisdiction to entertain the instant matter. 
3. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the defendant has 
approached this court with unclean, inequitable hands. 
4. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the preliminary 
objection lacks merit. 
5. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT striking out the defendant’s 
preliminary objection. 
In their reply on point of law, defendant counsels said that the case o f FAWEHINMI V. 
PRESIDENT FRN  was misapplied. They contended that the term locus standi cannot be 

8 |  P a g e
 
divorced from provision of S.6(6)b of Nigeria Constitution . Since, it provides that the 
constitutional right of a citizen in an action in court can only be ex ercised by a person who has 
complaint touching his civil right. However, by virtue of s. 7(3) of LSS constitution establishes 
locus standi to any aggrieved member of the society shall have right of access to judicial council. 
They submitted that the first claimant misapplied the law in that respect. I was further replied 
that section 43 of constitution was misapplied this was because the section did not have bearing 
regarding the case at hand but it bothers the academic committee of the society. It was subm itted 
that the above position of law was misapplied.  
 
Having meritoriously listened to both parties on preliminary objection, this honourable 
court proceeds to give its ruling. For ease determination; this following issue has been 
couched; 
 Whether or not claimants are members of the society? 
It is trite position of law that membership in any gathering is what the fons et origo calls it. In 
our society, the combining effect of section 5 and interpretation section 6 of LSS constitution is 
that membership in our society is any person who has been dully admitted and matriculated, see 
the case of ONIKEKE MUSA ABDULGAFAR V. LIBERTY C HAMBER (2019) 1 
LSSCLR 85. Based on this, members in the society are the admitted and matriculated students. 
The question that needs to be asked is that can it be said that 100 level students who have been 
duly admitted but have not been duly matriculated are not members of the society? If the answer 
to this poser is NEGATIVE! The next question to ask is that does Executive council has power 
on non -members of the society? If the answer to this poser is also NEGATIVE! It impliedly 

9 |  P a g e
 
means that Executive counci l of the Law Students’ Society (LSS) does not have any form of 
control on the 100 students until they are duly matriculated.  
In this case, the main prima facie cause of action is the allocation of 100 students, who 
are alleged not to be a member yet, to t he constitutionally recognised chambers in the society by 
the executive council that does not have any control or power on the said students because they 
are not members of the society. 
In the same vein, it is notorious principle of law that statute/consti tution should not be 
interpreted in isolation and that holistic interpretation should be deployed to arrived at intention 
of the law maker. see the case DASUKI AHMAD & ANOR V. HUMAN RIGHTS 
CHAMBERS & 3 ORS(2019) 1 LSSCLR 1  Section 10 of LSS constitution pr ovides for the 
composition of member of LSS, House of representatives and that a member should represent 
100 level constituency. As matter of common knowledge within the society and which this court 
has duty to observe. see ISSA HABEEBULLAH V. LAWRENCE OKW ARA & ANOR suit 
no. LSSJ/003/2020, AKITOLA V. LSS ISEC (2019) 1 LSSCLR 20 . A member of the present 
unmatriculated 100level students is a member of the current LSS House of Representative. By 
the above position, it shows that non-member of the society is a member of the legislative arm of 
the society. Is this reasonable? 
In the same vein, section 35 of LSS constitution grants LSS judiciary original jurisdiction 
on all matters and unlimited jurisdiction on civil and constitution matters within the society. Th e 
bone of contention is one of issue that this court can try because it is matter that arises out of the 
jurisdictional location of the court. Will it be reasonable to decline jurisdiction because the 
applicants are non-member of the society when the matte r is found within society and when the 

10 |  P a g e
 
purport of establishing court is to ensure that justice prevail within the society? Will it be just to 
leave the party unattended to allow the unjust wound to be deteriorating?   
The point I am driving at is that the use of literal interpretation to construe the 
membership provisions in the society may lead to absurdity, unreasonableness and ridiculous. In 
the long line of cases, it has been held that when literal interpretation will lead to absurdity, the 
court should deployed golden or functional rule of interpretation. This is to arrive at the intention 
of the lawmaker. SEE THE CASE OF ELELU -HABEEB V. A.G. FEDERATION (2012) 
ALL FWLR, IHUNWO V. IHUNWO (2013) 8 NWLR [1357].  It will be absurd on the part of 
the Executive council to believe 100level students are not members of the society but allocate 
them into chambers among other programmes to welcome these students into the society. It will 
be unheard of on the part of LSS House of Representatives to accept non -member of the society 
as member of Legislative arm of the society.  It will be ridiculous and unreasonable on the 
Judiciary to decline jurisdiction because an admitted student has not been matriculated when the 
matter is within original jurisdiction of the court and allow the claimants to move away with 
unjust wound in their hearts. 
To avoid the absurdity and unreasonableness, it is necessary to go into voyage of 
discovery for the intention of the lawmaker to be known because that is the main rule of 
interpretation, see the case of SUSSEX PEERAGE’S CASE. In this case, the use of literal rules 
is of no use but golden rules of interpretation should be used. The careful perusal of sections 5 
and 6 of LSS constitution reveals that the sections contemplate the situation  where a member 
will have been admitted but not matriculated. In such situation, the person will still be entitled to 
enjoy rights available to matriculated student s. If it is otherwise, there is no need of using 
admitted and matriculated when matriculated can work for both expression. See the case of 

11 |  P a g e
 
ONIKEKE & ORS V. LIBERTY CHAMBER  supra where it was held that  a Matriculated 
student that has to go process that starts with admission and ends with matriculation ceremony. 
Impliedly, nobody can be matriculated withou t firstly being admitted. As such, the section 
should have merely used “matriculated” rather than “admitted and matriculated” as it is 
contained in Section of 5 and 6 of LSS constitution.  
The application of literal rule of interpretation on the sections 5  and 6 of the LSS 
constitution will not make sense of the provisions therein and it will be saved to hold that the 
intention of the lawmaker is to bring in admitted members of the university in to the fold of the 
membership in the society. In the case of KABIRIKIM V. EMEFOR (2009)14 NWLR 
(PT1162) 602 S.C, it was rightly observed that; 
There are situations which would make it necessary to read the “and” in place of the 
word “or”  and vice versa. Such interpretation may be quite useful in order to avoid 
absurd or impracticable results. SEE ALSO NDOMA -EGBA V. CHUKWUOGOR 
(2004) 6 NWLR (PT869) 382 SC, SESAN V. JUDICIARY LSS (2019) 1 LSSCLR 69 
On the basis of the above analysis, LSS constitution by sections 5 and 6 recognizes two 
categories of membership. The first category is the admitted students pending the time they will 
be matriculated and second category is the matriculated students. The defendant counsel 
admitted in their PO that claimants are admitted students but only  contended that they have not 
been matriculated which invariably affects their locus standi before this court. On the above 
position of the law and analysis, Claimants are within the contemplation of the intention of the 
lawmakers when they are drafting th e constitution. I find the argument of the defendant 
unworthy because defendant has benefit from the provisions when dealing with the claimants 
among other members of 100 level class. It is basic principle of law that a party cannot benefit 

12 |  P a g e
 
from act and di sclaims liability therefrom. Equity will not avail a party that has neither done 
equity nor come with clean hands. The defendant will not deal with claimants, if it believes that 
claimants are not members of the society.  
It is hereby held that admitted me mbers of the society who are yet to be matriculated are 
members of the society within the purview sections 5 and 6 of LSS constitution. Therefore, 
claimants in these cases are member of the society and they have locus standi to maintain this 
action before this honorable court. The issue is settled in favor of the claimants and against the 
defendant. The PO is dismissed. This court grants prayer 1 of the claimants and other prayers are 
rejected. 
 
Appearances 
A. B. AbdulRaheem AGLSS    
Isiaka Azeez SGLSS 
P. O. Daniel 
A. A. Abdulazeez………………………………………...………for the defendant  
Q. A. Adedimeji with L .O. Okwara, B. A. Abass……………….. for 1st claimant 
A. A. Akintola with A. O. Habeeb, M . A. AbdulWakeel, A. I. Habeebullah, M. B. Abdulyekeen 
for 2nd claimant 
Amicus 
A P Ganiyu 
 