IN THE STUDENTS' UNION COURT UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN WEDNESDAY, 21ST FEBRUARY, 2024 SUIT NO: SUC/UIL/JC/OJ/002/2024 CITATION N0: (2025) 14 USLR
BEFORE THEIR LORDSHIPS;
HON. JUSTICE ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE (C.J.S.U)
HON. JUSTICE MUHAMMED KAMALDEEN GBEMISOLA (J.S.U) HON JUSTICE ABDULKAREEM TAOFEEQ IDOWU (J.S.U)
BETWEEN
1. IBRAHIM SAMIAT OYINDAMOLA
2. AMAO ABIMBOLA BASHIRAT
3. ASHIMI SAOBAN ADEDAYO
4. ADEDEJI FAVOUR ADEYINKA...............................CLAIMANT
AND
1. PRESIDENT OF THE STUDENTS' UNION BAR ASSOCIATION EXECUTIVE COUNCIL, STUDENTS’ UNION BAR ASSOCIATIONUNIVERSITY OF ILORIN..................DEFENDANTS
RATIO DECIDENDI
A party cannot successfully invoke the defence of force majeure to evade their statutory duty if they fail to provide credible evidence to support their claim of unforeseen circumstances beyond their control.
The defendant failure to establish the unavailabity of students union bar memebers as an unforeseen circumstance and the failure of the defendant to provide sufficient evidence to show that they had taken steps to hold the meeting despite the alleged unavailability of member
NOTABLE HOLDINGS AND PRONOUNCEMENT
ON FORCE MAJEURE
Force majeure is defined in as something that is unexpected and unforeseen happening making nonsense of the real situation envisaged by the parties. It is an event or effect that can neither be anticipated nor controlled. It includes both natural and human acts. The human acts
111
may be of political in nature including riots, strikes or war. C.G.G. (Nig.) Ltd. V. Augustine & Others, (2010) LPELR 8592 (CA), GLOBAL SPINNING MILLS v RELIANCE TEXTILE INDUSTRIES LTD (2017) LPELR-CA/L/732/2013, per ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE
ON WHEN A COUNSEL CAN INVOKE FORCE MAJEURE
A counsel cannot Invoke Force Majeure clause if they are relying on their own acts or
omissions.  per ABDULKAREEM TAOFEEK IDOWU
ON WHAT SHOULD AN AFFIDAVIT CONTAINS
Every affidavit used in the court shall contain only a statement of fact and circumstances to which the witness deposes, either of his own personal knowledge or from information which he believes to be true”. BUHARI V INEC & ORS (2008) LPELR- 814, Section 115(2) of the Evidence Act 2023  per ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE
EFFECT OF NONCOMPLIANCE
Noncompliance with the mandatory provisions of an Act is fatal whereas noncompliance with the rules of Court may be an irregularity which can be waived...noncompliance at the very beginning of the process cannot be condoned or corrected but the noncompliance that can occur and can be corrected in the course of the action can be condoned. Ufoegbunam v. Okongwu (2018) LPELR- 45086(CA), Surakatu v. N.H.D.S (1981) 4 SC 18. Per ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE
LEAD JUDGEMENT BY HONOURABLE JUSTICE ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE
On the 12th Day of February, 2024, the claimants who are also counsels brought this case within the judicial limelight of this honourable court through an originating summons where they prayed inter alia:
1. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the 1st Defendant has failed to perform its duty as laid down in the Students’ Union Bar Constitution 2017
2. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the provision of the Students’ Union Bar constitution must be followed strictly.
3. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the Students’ Union Bar Executive Council has failed to comply with the provisions of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution.
4.. AN ORDER OF THIS COURT MANDATING THE DEFENDANTS TO PAY a token of 20,000 naira to the claimant as cost of litigation.
5. AND SUCH OTHER DECLARATIONS AND ORDERS AS THIS HONOURABLE COURT MAY DEEM FIT AND PROPER IN THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THIS CASE OR MATTER.
112

The claimants also couched two issues for just determination of them before this court which are:
1. WHETHER OR NOT THE WORD SHALL AS USED IN SECTION 7 SUB 1 PART A OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION BAR CONSTITUTION 2017 AS AMENDED CONNOTES COMPULSION
2. WHETHER OR NOT THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL PARTICULARLY THE PRESIDENT OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION BAR HAS FAILED TO PERFORM ITS FUNCTION AS IT HAS BEEN LAID DOWN IN THE S”UDENTS’ UNION BAR CONSTITUTION 2017 AS AMENDED
At the first hearing of the case on Wednesday, 14th February, 2024, the court raised an issue suo moto when the claimants were about to adopt the written address in support of their originating process that:
Whether or not failure to state recent year of the court rules under which the claimants are bringing their case is against substantive rule of law for this suit to be struck out?
Lead Counsel to the Claimant, P.O. Jaiyeoba argued that stating provisions of the repealed 2021 Students’ Union Court Rules is an abnormality that goes to the root of the case based on the strength of the decision of the court in Mobil Production NG Ntd v. Davidson (2022) 7NWLR Part 1722 where the court heard that the Originating Process is an action which the case rest. She argued further that one of the elements to be in place for the jurisdiction of the court to be involved is that the suit must have been filed with due process of law as held in the famous case of Madukolu v Nkemdilim. The defendant submitted that this honourable court should not treat the failure of the Claimants to state the recent year of the new Students’ Union Court Rules in filing their originating summons as mere irregularity that the court may overlook rather, as a fundamental abnormality in the case for the case to be stroked out placing reliance on Okeziewe v. CBN where it was held that “the rules of the court are designed to ensure that justice is obtained by parties in the citadel of justice, rules of law are to be obeyed and observed and non-compliance often visited noncompetency which could lead to striking out of the case”.
The claimants on the other hand through one of their Counsels, O.D. Fatoye argued on the issue raised by the court suo moto that the SU Court Rules is not a substantive law but a procedural 3 law. Since Court Laws is not a substantive law and such can amount to mere irregularity. Arguing further, the case of Laguro v. Toku 2NWLR part 279 pp. 294-295, was relied on where the supreme Court held that “justice demand that in order to determine the real matter, pleadings may be amended. The case of Maitumbi v. Baraya 2017 2NWLR Part 1550 pp. 247 was also cited where the court held that mistake in the pleadings will not vitiate the proceedings as Courts are no longer inclined towards dwelling on technicalities but rather lead towards doing substantive justice in deserving cases. The claimants then submitted that based on their earlier mentioned judicial authorities, it is clear to deduce from Order 3 Rule 1 of the SU Court Rules that the mistake in the process will not nullify the case if it is not against substantive rule of law and since mistake in the typing of the process is a mere technicality and its contravention of a procedural law and not a Substantive law as such the
113

non-compliance with the Court Rules as regards error in the year should not nullify the originating process.
RESOLUTION OF THE COURT ON THE ISSUE RAISED SUO MOTO
On the issue raised by suo moto, Honourable Justice Ismail Khadijat Moromoke, the presiding justice on the case while delivering the ruling of the court on the said issue relied on the case of Ufoegbunam v. Okongwu (2018) LPELR- 45086(CA) where it was held that “noncompliance with the mandatory provisions of an Act is fatal whereas noncompliance with the rules of Court may be an irregularity which can be waived...noncompliance at the very beginning of the process cannot be condoned or corrected but the noncompliance that can occur and can be corrected in the course of the action can be condoned”. Also, in the case of Surakatu v. N.H.D.S (1981) 4 SC 18., it was held that “noncompliance with the mandatory provisions of an act is fatal whereas noncompliance with the rules of Court may be an irregularity which can be waived depending on the peculiar circumstances of the case to meet the ends of justice”.
Applying these above judicial pronouncements on the circumstances of the case at hand, it may be said that since this is an irregularity at the very beginning of this suit, it may seems to be fatal irregularity as held in Ufoegbunam v. Okongwu (2018) LPELR- 45086(CA). However, the fact that no case can be heard within the jurisdiction of the Students’ Union Court based on the New 2023 Students’ Union Court Rules without filing fee shows that the claimants were aware of the New Court Rules and it is lack of due diligence on their part for them to cited the actual provision of the court rules they are bringing their action but under an already repealed Court Rules. The court held that it amounts to mere irregularity as provided under Order 3 Rule 1 of Students’ Union Court Rules, 2023 As Reviewed and as such, the claimants were ordered to amend their originating summons orally with a written amendment of same filed at the court registry. The claimants did the oral amendment and the originating summons was deemed adopted as well as the affidavit and written address in support of the originating summons and the court adjourned for further hearing.
On Monday, 19th February, 2024, the claimants adumbrated on their written address after the defendant adopted their defense, affidavit and written address in support of their defense.The claimants raised two issues for determination before this honourable court::
Whereas the defendant raised a sole issue for determination in their defense which is:
Whether or not looking at the circumstances of this case the defense of force majeure will be applicable
ARGUMENT OF THE PARTIES ON THEIR ISSUES RAISED
As for the claimants on issue one, they argued that the word “shall” in its ordinary meaning connotes mandatoriness and compulsion, and as used in section 7 sub 1 part A of the students’ union bar constitution 2017 as amended, it is mandatory in nature and not
114

discretionary. Producing Section 7 sub 1 part A of the students’ union bar constitution 2017 as amended provides that
“There shall be a general meeting held at least once in a month called General Meeting.”
They argued further that whenever the word ‘shall’ be used, it depicts compulsion and its directives must be observed as the word in contention was given judicial blessing in the case of ODUSOTE V ODUSOTE (2012) 3 NWLR (pt.1288) CA 482 where the Court of Appeal observed per Garba JCA:
‘The use of the word “shall” in a statute ordinarily means that the provisions are mandatory, because the word is used to express a command or directive which does not admit of a discretion.’ Also, the claimants argued that in the case of ALADETAN VS OGUNYEMI & ORS (2010) LPELR 3699 (CA). It was held that “the word SHALL connote compulsion and whatever it seeks must and must be done”.
The claimants also placed heavy reliance on AKANI KAMALDEEN & 2 ORS V WELFARE DIRECTOR LSS & 2 ORS 2021 LCELR (2021022) where it was held that “The word shall when used in statutory provision imports anything must be done, it is a form of command or mandate”. The claimants submitted on the first issue that the word “shall” under Section 7 sub 1 part A of the students’ union bar constitution 2017 as amended makes it mandatory for the defendants in this instant case to follow its dictates with strict adherence and pray this honourable court so hold.
On the second issue, based on the averments in the affidavit in support of the claimants’ originating summons, it was argued and submitted that the defendant has failed to comply with the mandatory provision of Section 7 sub 1 part A of the students’ union bar constitution 2017 as amended by failing to hold at least one general meeting of the students’ union bar association since the date the school and faculty resumes academic session on December 4th, 2023 till December 31st, 2023 which has render the defendant to be on violation of the provision of section 7(1)-part A of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution, 2017 as amended and the claimants urged this honorable court to hold so.
On the sole issue raised by the defendant, the defendants argued that although the provision of section 7(1)-part A of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution, 2017 as amended dictates that the Students’ Union Bar Association must hold her general assembly at least once in a month, the non-availability of most students including members of the students’ Union Bar Association as averred in the affidavit in support of their defense, has prevented the plans of the executives of the students’ union bar association to hold a general meeting in December unrealized and this amount to defense of force majeure as defined in C.G.G. (Nig.) Ltd. V. Augustine & Others, 2010 LPELR 8592 CA.
The defendants argued further that since the law can not command the impossible “lex non cogito ad impossibilia”, the unavailability of members to form quorum for the general meeting of the students’ union bar frustrated the plans of the executives of the students union
115

to hold the general meeting as contained in the affidavit in support of their defense and submit before this court that owing to the circumstances of this case, defense of force majeure will avail the defendants.
The claimants replied on point of law that the defendant misapplied the defense of force majeure as it can only be revoked in unforeseen circumstance and the defendants has failed to show what amounted to unforeseen circumstance that prevented the holding of the general meeting in 7
December placing heavy reliance on GLOBAL SPINNING MILLS v RELIANCE TEXTILE INDUSTRIES LTD (2017) LPELR-CA/L/732/2013
RESOLUTION OF THE COURT IN THIS CASE
Having perused the arguments of the parties on the issues they have raised respectively for determination before this court, this honourable court deems it fit and proper that a sole issue will be important for the just determination of this suit which is:
WHETHER OR NOT THE DEFENSE OF FORCE MAJEURE WILL EXCUSE THE DEFENDANTS FROM THEIR STATUTORY DUTY IN THE LIGHT OF THE FACTS OF THIS CASE?
Undoubtedly, the defendants admitted that the word “shall” used under section 7(1)-part A of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution, 2017 as amended dictates that the Students’ Union Bar Association means that the Students’ Union Bar Association must hold a general meeting at least once in a month. However, what is in issue is whether the defense of force majeure will excuse the defendants from their duty as provided under section 7(1)-part A of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution, 2017 as amended in light of the fact of this case.
The facts before this court are contained in the one of the claimants’ affidavit in support of their originating summons and the defendants’ affidavit in support of their own defense. Paragraphs 3, 4,5,6 and 7 of the claimant’s affidavit with paragraph 1,2,3,4,5,6 and 7 of the defendants’ affidavit are relevant to the issue for determination.
It should be noted that affidavits are statement of facts only as provided under Section 115(1) of the Evidence Act 2023 as amended,
“Every affidavit used in the court shall contain only a statement of fact and circumstances to which the witness deposes, either of his own personal knowledge or from information which he believes 8 to be true”. As such by Section 115(2) of the Evidence Act 2023, “an affidavit shall not contain extraneous by way of objection, prayer, or legal argument or conclusion”. As held by the supreme Court in BUHARI V INEC & ORS (2008) LPELR- 814 to the effect that such affidavit or paragraph of the affidavit which breaches SECTION 115(2) OF THE EVIDENCE ACT shall be incurably and fundamentally defective warranting the honourable court to strike out same.
116

A careful perusal of the relevant paragraphs of the affidavits of both parties, paragraph 5 and 6 of the defendant’s affidavit offends provision of Section 115(2) of the Evidence Act 2023. For the purpose of record Paragraph 5 and 6 of the defendants’ affidavit read as follows:
“5. That I know as a matter of fact that the congress of the students’ union bar cannot hold without quorum.
6. That I know for the fact that most students which includes members of the Students’ Union Bar haven’t resumed in December”.
Paragraph 5 is a legal argument and argument on point of law by virtue of Section 7(4)- Part A of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution, 2017 as amended and thus struck out while some parts of paragraph 6 of the defendants’ affidavit “most students” is a conclusion as it is not within the personal knowledge of the deponent to the defendant’s affidavit. As a registrar of the 1st defendant, he can only have verified information about members of the 1st defendant by virtue of SECTION 5(5)©-PART A OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION BAR CONSTITUTION 2017 AS AMENDED and not information about “most students” of the university at large and faculty of law in particular. Therefore, paragraph 6 of the defendants’ affidavit stands in part.
Now to the issue at hand, Force majeure is defined in GLOBAL SPINNING MILLS v RELIANCE TEXTILE INDUSTRIES LTD (2017) LPELR-CA/L/732/2013 as “something that is unexpected and unforeseen happening making nonsense of the real situation envisaged by the parties”. Also, in C.G.G. (Nig.) Ltd. V. Augustine & Others, (2010) LPELR 8592 (CA), force majeure was also defined according to Black’s Law Dictionary 8th edition, Force majeure is an event or effect that can neither be anticipated nor controlled. It includes both natural and human acts. The human acts may be of political in nature including riots, strikes or war”.
In M.V. CAROLINE MAERSK v NOKOY INVESTMENT LTD (2002)12 NWLR (PT. 782)472, the Supreme Court held that there is the contractual obligation which requires a person to take reasonable care to achieve the result by a contract. There is a second category of contractual obligation which requires a person to achieve a particular result, though it allows excuse of non-performance of force majeure”.
In the light of the fact of the case before this honourable court, although, the deponent to the defendant’s affidavit who happens to be the registrar of the 1st defendant averred that most members of the students’ union bar association have not resumed in December which has frustrated the plans of the executives to hold a general meeting in December and rending it impossible to perform, this honourable court holds that this not enough on the part of the defendants to successfully rely on the defense of force majeure in evading their statutory duty as contained under section 7(1)-part A of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution, 2017 as amended. The law does not even require all members of the students’ union bar association to be at the general meeting but only registered members by the combined reading of section 7(4) & (5) part A of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution, 2017 as amended. Registered members
117

of the Students’ Union Bar Association as members that have paid their practicing fees for the academic session. In fact, the law does not even require all registered members of the Students’ Union Bar Association to be at its general meeting but just 30 registered members or one-third of its total registered as provided under Section 7(3)- PART A OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION BAR CONSTITUTION 2017 AS AMENDED. It is now left for the defendant to show to this honourable court with credible evidence through further avernments in their affidavit or any other sufficient evidence that, despite the fact that University of Ilorin has resumed a new academic session on December 4th, 2023 and faculty of law as established by virtue of SECTION 3(a) OF UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN ACT 2017 has also commenced academic activities as averred in the affidavits of both parties, the defendants have the duty to show that most members of the association who have not resumed are mostly registered members of the association and their unavailability has frustrated the every plan and step taken by the executives of the association to hold any general meeting in December for the defense of force majeure to be successfully invoked. Failure to establish before this honorable court that most members of the association that have not resumed as averred in paragraph 6 of the defendant’s affidavit are mostly the registered members of the association and absence of which no quorum whatsoever can ever be met for any general meeting, such a failure has left the court in perplexity and the balance of probabilities fail to tilt towards the side of the defendants. It is a well-established principle of law that “Whoever desires any court to give him judgement, as to any legal right or liability on the existence of facts must prove that those facts exist” as held in AGBABIAKA v FIRST BANK (2019) LPELR-48125(SC).
Therefore, since the defendants did not successfully invoked the defense of force majeure to evade their statutory duty contained under SECTION 7(1)-PART A OF STUDENTS’ UNION BAR CONSTITUTION 2017 AS AMENDED, this honourable court holds that the defendants have breached the said section by failing to hold a general meeting at least once in December and as such this court grant the 1st, 2nd and 3rd prayers contained in the claimants’ originating summons with two thousand, five hundred and seventy-five naira (#2,575) as cost of litigation. This suit thereby succeeds and all orders are to be duly and immediately complied with by the defendant.
CONCURRENT JUDGEMENT OF HONOURABLE JUSTICE MUHAMMED KAMALDEEN
I have the opportunity to read the draft of the leading Judgement delivered by my Learned Brother,Hon Justice Ismail Khadijah Moromoke and I must say that I agree totally with the decisions of the legal wig. I will like to add that truly the issue to be resolved in this suit is in relation to whether or not the defence of force majeure avails the defendants for the non - performance of the statutory duties imposed on it by the provision of Section 7 SUB 1 of the Students’ union bar constitution ,2017 as ammended which provides thus;
“There shall be a general meeting held at least once in a month called General Meeting.”
118

As to the principle of Force majeure raised by the defendants,force majeure is defined by the court of appeal in the case of GLOBAL SPINNING MILLS v RELIANCE TEXTILE INDUSTRIES LTD (2017) LPELR-CA/L/732/2013 is defined as:
“Something that is unexpected and unforeseen happening, making nonsense of the real situation envisaged by parties” Deducibly ,the defence of force majeure will avail a person who can establish that
There was indeed
1. An unforeseen or unexpected happening which is not caused by by the defendants .
2. The unforeseen act is beyond the control of the defendant.
3. Such unforeseen circumstances made the performance of an already planned situation impossible.
The defendants who in this case invoked the defence of force majeure, and who by section 131(2) of the Evidence Act ,2011 is saddled to prove the elements mentioned above .As section 131(2)provides as follows :
”when a person is bound to prove the existence of any fact it is said that the burden of proof lies on that person ”
It is no doubt that the defendant is bound to lead evidence of facts which shows the existence of unforeseen circumstances that has led to their inability to hold a meeting for the month of December ,which they failed to . Accordingly, they failed to establish the plans they had in relation to making sure the meeting hold during that month which was aborted by an unforeseen circumstance. It is on this note, that I concur with the judgement of my Learned brother, honourable justice Ismail Khadijah Moromoke and I hold that the defendants have violated the provision of Section 7 SUB 1 Part A of the students’ union bar constitution, 2017 as amended and that the 1st ,2nd and 3rd prayers of the claimants are granted. I make no order as to cost.
CONCURRENT JUDGEMENT OF HONOURABLE JUSTICE ABDULKAREEM
TAOFEEQ IDOWU
I have the opportunity to read the draft of the lead judgement just delivered by my Noble Lord, Hon. Justice Ismail Khadijat Moromoke and I must say that I totally align myself with the decisions of my noble Lord. Reiterating on the sole issue raised by the defendants in its defense, let me hammer as follows: As stated by my noble Lord, Black’s Law Dictionary 9th Edition defines ‘force majeure’ as “an event or effect that can neither be anticipated nor controlled. It involves both natural and human acts. The human acts may be political in nature, including riots, strikes or war.” There is an important caveat and that is, parties cannot invoke a Force Majeure clause if they are relying on their own acts or omissions. In this instance case, the defendants’ failure to show this Hon. Court credible evidence to
  119

corroborate the fact that members unavailability has frustrated all plans to hold the Congress in December made the principle of force majeure impossible to avail the defendants. And therefore, the principle of “lex non cogito ad impossibilia” can not be invoked in this instant case. I thereby concur with my Noble Lord by holding that the defendants have breached the said section and as such that the 1st, 2nd and 3rd prayers as contained in the claimants’ originating summons be granted with #2,575 as cost of litigation.
APPEARANCES:
FOR THE CLAIMANTS:
S.O Ibrahim (Lead Counsel) S. A Ashimi
F.A. Adedeji
O. D Fatoye
A.B. Amao
M.O. Akanbi
FOR THE DEFENDANTS
P.O. Jaiyeoba (Lead Counsel at the first hearing)
A.O. Alimi (Lead Counsel in subsequent proceedings of the case) M.A Ajenifuja
