1 | P a g e  
 
ISSA HABEEBULAH v AKANNI & 1 ORS 
CITATION: (2021) LCELR 2021003 
In the Law Students’ Society Court Of Unilorin 
ON WEDNESDAY, 3RD FEBRUARY, 2021 
Suit No: LSSJ/003/2020 
Before Their Lordships: 
Hon. Judge Abdulkareem Abdulrazzaq Ketu – Chief Judge, LSS Court of Unilorin 
Hon. Judge Muhammed Shuaib Oladimeji - Judge, LSS Court of Unilorin 
Hon. Judge Tunji-Lawal Lawal Bolaji - Judge, LSS Court of Unilorin 
 
BETWEEN 
ISSA HABEEBULAH 
Claimants 
 
AND 
AKANNI KAMALDEEN 
OKWARA LAWRENCE  
Defendants 
 
RATIO DECIDENDI 
1. COURT: THE ESSENCE OF RULES OF COURT 
   “The implication of the above position is that rules of court are directions and guidelines that are 
purposefully made to ensure smooth drive of vehicle to the destination of justice. The rationale 
behind every court rules is justice, any interpretation or  application that will be counter -productive 
will be jettisoned for interest of justice. It implies that interest of justice should always be 
considered in cases of contravention of court rules.” PER KETU (CJLSS).-  @ PG 12 

2 | P a g e  
 
2. COURT :WHAT JUSTICE ENTAILS 
“The above positions of law are pointing to no direction but that justice is most significant and 
important tenet of any society. It implies that in any case or matter before the court, an average 
or reasonable human being in the court must hold strong view th at justice has been done to all 
parties in the case. The justice in question can be of different kinds, it can be Substantive Justice, 
Procedural Justice or Technical Justice. While court must always observe the first two kinds of 
justices, it must be cons cious of technical justice because it usually slaughters the ultimate 
justice which is substantive justice. See the case of DAGBO V. FIN. SEC. HUMAN RIGHT 
CH. (supra). It is also the duty of court to ensure that technical justice is not dressed in the 
garment of procedural justice and vice versa. This is due to the thin line of demarcation between 
the two types of justice. See SESAN v. JUDICIARY LSS (supra) pg. 72 Even, procedural 
justice at times is sacrifice for substantial justice in warranting situation , this is because the 
ultimate and golden goal for establishment of court as administration of justice is to ensure that 
substantial justice has been done. Substantial justice can only be done when rights and liabilities 
of each party in a specific case ha s been substantially settled and resolved. See OMOJU V. FRN 
(2008) AELR 3109 (SC) AND AKINGBOLA & ANOR V. INTERCONTINENTAL BANK 
PLC & ORS (2014) AELR 3107 (CA)” PER KETU (CJLSS) @ PG 13 
 
 
3. COURT- WHETHER INTEREST OF JUSTICE SUPERCEDES THE APPLICATION 
OF RULES OF COURT 
“Depending on the circumstance of each  particular case, where the non -compliance has 
occasioned miscarriage of justice or where the right of the adverse party will be affected, the 
court shall not treat the non -compliance as a mere irregularity  and as such mandate the rules to 
be followed or nullify the proceedings as the case may be. But in a situation where it has not 
occasioned miscarriage of justice it shall be treated as mere irregularity and should not vitiate 
the proceedings. This is beca use all rules of Court are made in aid of justice and that being so, 
the interest of justice will have to be given priority over any rules, compliance of which will lead 
to outright injustice. The rules are not sine quo non in the determination of a case a nd therefore 
not immutable. See Oni V. FAYEMI (2008) 8 NWLR [1089] 408. In ABUBAKAR 
V.YAR‟ADUA (2008) 4 NWLR [1078] 465@ 510 paras G-H” PER KETU (CJLSS) @ PG 11 
4. CONTRACT- WHEN CONTRACTUAL LIABILTY ARISES BETWEEN PARTIES 
“It is the basic principle of law th at whenever there is an exchange of promises which has led to 
agreement between persons for the performance of a certain activity(ies), the strong pillars of 
valid contract such as offer, acceptance and consideration will have been established in that case. 
And it will be case of valid contract, should there be any breach of duty, the aggrieved person 
can maintain action for redress before any court of law with jurisdiction. See the case of 
ISIYAKU V. ZWINGINA (2003) 6 NWLR [PT. 817] 560, JADESIMI V. EGBE ( 2003) 10 
NWLR [PT. 827] 1, ALADE V. ALIC (2010) 19 NWLR [PT. 1226] 111.” PER KETU (CJLSS)  
@ PG 17. 

3 | P a g e  
 
5. EVIDENCE: RECALLING OF WITNESSES 
“On the 24 of Jan. 2020, Defendants counsel sought an application for the recalling of 1st 
Defendant while relying on the following authorities section 200 CPA, Ogbodu V Ogoga (1976) 
NMLR 400. Jeffcom Global Integrated V. Emerging Marketing (2018) LPELR 44 916. Claimant 
raised an objection to the application while relying on Bassey V. Ekanem (2001) 1 NWLR [694] 
376. This honourable hereby ruled thus “It is trite that an application can be moved for recalling 
of a witness for clarification of existing evidenc e before the court. See the case of JEFFCOM 
GLOBAL INTEGRATED V. EMERGING MARKETING (2018) LPELR 44916. In the case of 
ONWUKA V. OWOLEWA (2001) 7 NWLR [713] 695, it was held that a witness can only be 
recalled subject to the consent of the parties. See als o OMOREGBEE V. LAWANI (1980) 3 -4 
SC 108: ELENDU V EKWOABA (1998) 12 NWLR (PT.578) 320; ELENDU V. EKWOABA 
(1995) 3 NWLR (PT.386) 704 REFERRED TO.](P.713, PARAS. E-F). However, where there is 
an objection to the application of recalling of witness, the court  will rule that the witness cannot 
be recalled without the other side consenting to it. See the case of DICKSON OJIEGBE ANOR. 
V MARCUS UBANI ANOR. (1961) ALLN.L.R. 277. Thereby the application is not granted” 
PER KETU (CJLSS) @ PG 14 - 15. 
6. INTERPRETATION  WHEN WORDS USED IN A STATUTE WILL HAVE A 
MANDATORY EFFECT 
“However, to determine whether or not a word will have mandatory effect, recourse is mostly 
made to the context of the usage and the implication of not complying with the provision of the 
law. see AJADI WHEN KEHINDE V. LORD ACTIVIST, HUMAN RIGHT CHAMBER 
LSSJ/001/2020 and AJEWOLE V. SPEAKER, LSS HOUSE OF REP (2019) 1 LSSCLR 155 @ 
164. Apart from the general position of the law above, there are exceptions to this general rule 
that;  
1. Where the mandatory w ords are contained in the rules of court and the demand of justice 
dictates a permissive application. 
2. Where other provisions of an enactment or written document show that compliance with such 
mandatory words can be waive or that they should be applied p ermissively.” PER KETU 
(CJLSS)@ PG 10 
7. PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE: CONDITION PRECEDENT FOR APPEARANCE OF 
COUNSEL BEFORE THE LSS COURT 
“This honourable court aligns itself with the position of defendants‟ counsel that conditions 
precedent for a person to be addr essed as counsel before this court is that the person must be 
called to student Union Bar and the person must be a member of a legally recognised chambers 
in the society” PER KETU (CJLSS) @ PG 6 
8. PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE: WHETHER NON-INDICATION OF COUNSEL’S 
CHAMBERS ON A PROCESS CAN NULLIFY AN ACTION 
“However, it will be ridiculous to deny the fact that claimant‟s counsel is attached to a chamber 
legally recognised in the society when it is the matter of common knowledge that one of 
exercises or actions performs by Executive Council of LSS in welcoming the new intakes to the 

4 | P a g e  
 
society is affiliating them to legally recognised and constitutionally established chambers in the 
society. I can categorically say that even the applicant cannot deny the existence of this  fact to 
demonstrate its notoriety within the society. This shows that any student in the society will 
definitely be affiliated to one legally recognised chambers or the other. In the galaxy of 
authorities, it has been held that court has duty to observe f act of common knowledge. See the 
case of AKINTOLA V. LSS ISEC (2019) 1 LSSCLR 20 @28 and KABO AIR LTD V. THE 
O‟CORPORATION LTD (2014) AELR 4773. This is also statutorily garmented by the 
provision of S. 124(2) of Evidence Act 2011. In the case of OMOKUWAYO  V. FRN (2013) 9 
NWLR [1359] 300 @ 332, it was held that “the court is expected to take judicial notice under 
section 124 of evidence Act and if on the face of the record serious questions of fairness of the 
proceeding is evident” Impliedly, claimant‟s cou nsel who is student of law in the society cannot 
be an exception to the above process. It will not be just and right to go against the fact of 
common knowledge and hold contrariwise when the only assertion and fact before the court is 
that counsels do not indicate the name of their chambers and deprive them of the quality that 
they do not lack.” PER KETU (CJLSS) @ PG 6 -7. 
 
 
LEAD JUDGMENT DELIEVERED BY HON. JUDGE ABDULKAREEM ABDURRAZZAQ 
KETU CJLSS;  
Life was breathed into this matter by writ of summon attached with statement of claim of 17 paragraphs, 
list of witnesses, written statement on oath of the witnesses, list and copies of documents to be relied 
upon. On 2nd of December, 2019 Claimant‟s couns el sought the leave of the court to adopt all the 
processes as they were filed before the court and same was granted, the processes were deemed adopted. 
The fact of the case was that the plaintiff/claimant was a member of the 200level student of faculty of  
law. A defunct Trailblazer Academic Committee within the level organised an online quiz competition 
with the obligation that winner and runner ups would be given prizes of different kinds. Claimant 
participated in that competition and had highest score of  the quiz competition. The committee being 
acted for by the defendants in this case failed to give the prize to the claimant upon resumption as 
stipulated in the terms of the competition. Being aggrieved, claimant approached this honourable court 
to enforc e the term of online quiz competition. The claimant sought the following prayers; a. A 
DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the promises made by the defendants are 
enforceable. 
b. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT mandating the defendant to pay the sum of (One 
thousand five hundred Naira) N1,500.00 worth airtime and plate of item7 as promised by the 
defendants.  
c. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT mandating the defendants to pay  the sum of (Ten 
Thousand Naira Only) N10,000.00 as the cost of this litigation.  

5 | P a g e  
 
d. AND FOR SUCH OTHER ORDERS AND DECLARATIONS THIS COURT SHALL DEEM FIT 
ON THE CIRCUMSTANCE OF THIS CASE.  
On 5th of Dec. 2019, Preliminary Objection (PO) was filed by Defend ants which was supported by an 
affidavit of 13 paras. The PO was based on the following ground;  
1. That LSS Constitution and LSS court rules set out a condition precedent  to be met before the LSS 
court can hear any person before it, same being that such p erson must belong to a chamber recogniz ed 
under section 40 of the LSS constitution.  
2. That all the claimant‟s counsels have failed to identify which chambers to which the being to or any 
chamber at all in their court processes.  
3. That by necessary implication the claimant counsels have no right of audience before the LSS court. 
4. That the court is as well robbed of the capability to hear such counsels of the claimant.  
5. That this honourable court lacks jurisdiction to entertain this case. Three issue s were distilled from 
these grounds, they were;  
• Whether or not persons who do not belong to a chamber have the right of audience before the LSS 
court?  
• Whether or not the claimant counsels must indicate their chambers on the court processes?  
• Whethe r or not the failure of the claimant‟s counsels to state their chambers can vitiate their court 
processes? On the first issue; it was contended that only person who was called to Students‟ Union Bar 
and attached to a legally recognised chamber in the Socie ty can be granted right of audience as counsel 
before this honourable court. They relied on the conjunctive reading of sec. 6, 37(3), 40(1) and (6) o f 
LSS constitution and Or. 22 R  3 of LSS Court Rules. It was submitted that the person that did not 
belong to any chamber had no right of audience before LSS court. On the second issue, it was argued 
and submitted that by virtue of sec. 40 of LSS constitution and O 22 LSS Court (Civil Procedure) Rules 
counsels had the duty to indicate the name of the chambers. On the third issue; it was contended and 
submitted that failure to indicate the name of the chamber vitiated the court processes. The case of 
HAMZAT V SANNI (2015) 5 NWLR [1455] 489  among other were relied upon. The followings were 
prayed for;  
AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT striking out or dismissing the suit for being 
fundamentally defective and outside the jurisdictional competency of this honourable court.  
AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT mandating the claimant to pay the sum of N1,500 
(one thousand five hundred naira) for cost of filing this suit.  
AND FOR SUCH OTHER ORDERS AND DECLARATIONS THIS COURT SHALL DEEM FIT O N 
THE CIRCUMSTANCE OF THIS CASE.  

6 | P a g e  
 
In their reply to PO, clamant counsels also couched three issues thus; I. Whether or not  non-indication 
of chambers is mere irregularity? II. Whether or not non -indication of chamber can be ignored or 
rectified by this honourable court? III. Whether or not omission of name of chambers on the face of 
court processes is tantamount to not being called to bar? On the first issue; it was contended and 
submitted that by the claimant‟s counsels non -indication of name of the chambers is mere irregularity 
provided it was not substantial enough to occasion injustice. O 3 R 1(2) of LSS court rules was ci ted 
and the case of HRH OBA AGUNBIADE & ORS V. ATLOR NIG. LTD. & ORS (2015) AELR 
6588 CA. On the second issue; it was argued and submitted that any omission/mistake can be rectified 
provided that will not cause injustice. PASTOR AKINBOYE DAVID V. PRINCE AB AYOMI (suit 
no. CA/A/EPT/HA/51/2015) was referred to. On the third issue; it was contended and submitted that an 
omission of indication of name of chambers on the court processes did not tantamount to not being 
called to bar. They prayed that court should discountenance with argument of the defendant in their PO. 
Reply on point of law was not really substantial but mere restatement of argument.  
Having listened to arguments of both counsels, the case was adjourned till 10th of Dec. 2019 for ruling 
on the PO . RULING ON THE DEFENDANTS‟ PRELIMINARY OBJECTION For proper 
determination of PO, this honourable court couches these issues;  
1. Whether or not claimant‟s counsel has right of audience before this honourable court?  
2. Whether or not non-indication of chamber can rob the court of its jurisdiction to entertain this case?  
On the first issue; defendant‟s counsel had beautifully contended that only person who is called to 
Students‟ Bar and attaches to a legally recognised chamber in the Society can be granted  right of 
audience as counsel before this honourable court. Reliance is placed on the conjunctive reading of sec. 
6, 37(3), 40(1) and (6) of LSS constitution and Or. 22 ru 3 of LSS Court Rules. This honourable court 
aligns itself with the position of defen dants‟ counsel that conditions precedent for a person to be 
addressed as counsel before this court is that the person must be called to student Union Bar and the 
person must be a member of a legally recognised chambers in the society.  It is trite law that condition 
precedent must be fulfilled at all material time. See the cases of DASUKI AHMAD & ANOR V. 
HUMAN RIGHT CHAMBERS & 3 ORS (2019) 1 @ 6 LSSCLR pg. 1, DAGBO V. FINANCIAL 
SEC. HUMAN RIGHT CHAMBERS (2019) 1 LSSCLR pg 101 @ 104.  In the instance case, the  
condition precedent in contention is that, which chamber is the claimant‟s counsels affiliate to. This can 
be easily known by indicating same on the claimant‟s court process. However, it will be ridiculous to 
deny the fact that claimant‟s counsel is attached to a chamber legally recognised in the society when it is 
the matter of common knowledge that one of exercises or actions performs by Executive Council of 
LSS in welcoming the new intakes to the society is affiliating them to legally recognised and 
constitutionally established chambers in the society. I can categorically say that even the applicant 
cannot deny the existence of this fact to demonstrate its notoriety within the society. This shows that 
any student in the society will definitely be affiliated to one legally recognised chambers or the other. In 
the galaxy of authorities, it has been held that court has duty to observe fact of common knowledge. See 
the case of AKINTOLA V. LSS ISEC (2019) 1 LSSCLR 20 @28 and KABO AIR LTD V. THE 

7 | P a g e  
 
O’CORPORATION LTD (2014) AELR 4773 . This is also statutorily garmented by the provision of 
S. 124(2) of Evidence Act 2011. In the case of OMOKUWAYO V. FRN (2013) 9 NWLR [1359] 300 
@ 332, it was held that “the court is expected to take judicial notice under section 124 of  evidence Act 
and if on the face of the record serious questions of fairness of the proceeding is evident” Impliedly, 
claimant‟s counsel who is student of law in the society cannot be an exception to the above process. It 
will not be just and right to go a gainst the fact of common knowledge and hold contrariwise when the 
only assertion and fact before the court is that counsels do not indicate the name of their chambers and 
deprive them of the quality that they do not lack. This honourable court hereby hold s that claimant‟s 
counsels are qualified to be granted right of audience before this honourable court for reason that he has 
fulfilled the conditions precedent for that purpose . This issue is settled in favour of the claimant‟s 
counsels and against defenda nt On the second issue; defendant‟s counsel strongly contended that non -
indication of chambers‟ name by claimant‟s counsels is an affront to practice direction and that it goes 
to the issue of conditions precedent, reliance is place on the sec. 40(1)(6) of  LSS constitution and O 22 
R 3 of LSS Court Rules , HAMZAT V. SANNI (2015) 5 NWLR [1455] 489  among others. It was 
further argued that non-indication of chambers will affect the jurisdiction of the court. However, on the 
other side, claimant‟s counsels argue d that non -indication of chambers‟ name is mere irregularity and 
can be rectified by this honourable court. The case of HRH OBA AGUNBIADE & ORS V. ATLOR 
Nig. Ltd. & ORS (2015) AELR 6588 CA  among other was cited. A careful perusal of the omission in 
question requires another careful and closer examination to determine whether it is substantial or not. 
The examination reveals that there is noncompliance with the rules of practice that chambers‟ name of 
counsel should be indicated. By the provision of O 3 R 1( 1) of LSS Court Rules, non -compliance shall 
nullify the proceeding but a further reading of O 3 R 1(2) of the same Court Rules is to effect that any 
non-compliance that is not substantial enough to affect the purpose of the proceeding should be treated 
as irregularity. The apposite question now is „does this non -compliance in this case substantial enough 
to occasion injustice?‟ The answer in our opinion is emphatic NO; this is because non -indication of 
chambers‟ name does not in any way have effect on the c ase of the applicant at any stretch of 
imagination. In the case of PASTOR AKINBOYE DAVID V. PRINCE ABAYOMI (suit no. 
CA/A/EPT/HA/51/2015 court held thus “the current and prevailing principle in the administration of 
justice however is that where in beginning or in the course of the proceedings a party commits an/a 
omission/mistake in the laid down practice and procedure, it can be regarded  as an irregularity which 
the tribunal or court can and should rectify or even ignore so long as it is satisfied that the omission or 
mistake occasions or is incapable of occasioning any injustice to the other party…” It is noteworthy that 
in this case, non-compliance is not capable of occasioning any injustice to the other party. In the case of 
DAGBO V. FIN. SEC. HRC (supra) ; per Ketu JLSS (as he then was) said “allowing the argument of 
defendants‟ counsels (that non -indication of name of chambers is condi tion precedent) is one that will 
lead to technicality. Courts have been warned against technical justice at the expense of substantive 
justice”. See also the case of SENATOR (MRS) EME UFORT EKEALE V. UBN PLC. (20140 
AELR, CBN V. OKEB NIG. LTD. (2014) AELR (suit no. CA/A/554/2013) . This honourable court 
hereby aligns itself with argument of the claimant and discountenance with the contention of 
defendants. It is hereby held that non -indication of name of chambers thought is important and requires 

8 | P a g e  
 
but it is n ot good ground to deprive court of its jurisdiction. It is important to state that this is not an 
open door for counsel to be non -diligent because court will always rise to each occasion and each case 
will be considered on its merit to determine whether or  not the nature of mistake/omission is mere 
irregularity or serious omission. It is expedient on the part of the counsel to indicate the name of the 
chambers so as to avoid any objection that buys away the precious time and energy of the court. And 
this is not to say that indication of name of chambers is not important or legally required but in this 
instance case, it is not substantial enough to deprive or rob away the jurisdiction of Court. All the issues 
herein are settled in favour of the claimant and a gainst the defendant, the PO is hereby dismissed. After 
delivering the ruling, Claimant‟s counsel moved a motion to adopt their application for amendment of 
their originating processes which was object to on the ground that it was not properly signed. The 
motion for adoption was not allowed and claimant was ordered to refile the properly signed application 
for amendment of pleadings. On 12th of Dec. 2019, claimant refiled the amended application for 
amendment of pleadings and same was duly adopted upon leav e of court. Claimant sought for the 
adjournment to file the amended court processes in order to effect the amendment and same was 
granted. Claimant was ordered to file the amended processes on 13th of Dec. and the Defendant should 
file any other processes they might have or statement of defence on or before 16th of Dec. 2019. The 
case was adjourned till 17th of Dec. 2019. 
On the 17th of Dec. 2019, claimant sought the leave to adopt the amended originating processes, in the 
absence of objection the leave was  granted and also another PO supported by 12 paragraphs deposed to 
by Okwara Lawrence. The grounds for the PO are:  
i. That by virtue of the provision of O 1 R 2, LSS Court Rules 2019 applies to all proceeding in 
the LSS court.  
ii. That the LSS court rules 2019,  provides as one of its objectives in O 1 R 2(2) speedy 
dispensation of justice which is one of the tenets of rules of fair hearing.  
iii. That the above suit commenced on 2nd of Dec. 2019 through writ of summons. iv. That till 
17th of Dec. makes it the 15th da y that the matter would be going on contrary to the 
provision of O 22 R 5 which provides that matter should be dispense with within 12 days of 
the commencement of its hearing. 
iv. That as such being a party to this suit and should kindly decline jurisdiction a s judgment 
given outside jurisdiction competence is a nullity. Three issues were distilled from the above 
grounds. They were; 
 • Whether or not the provision of O 22 R 5 of the law Students Society Court Rules 2019 is 
sacrosanct and binding to a case?  
• Whether a court of law can deliver judgement outside the limit of time stipulated for the 
delivery of judgement?  
• Whether or not such judgment delivered outside the time limit would best be a nullity and 
academic? On issue one, it was contended that th e provision of O 22 R 5 of LSS court rules 
was sacrosanct and binding because court rules should be obeyed, the case of MISS 
EZEANAH V. ALH. ATTA MAMOUD (2004) 7 NWLR [873] 468 @ 502  among others 

9 | P a g e  
 
was cited. It was further contended that the word “Shall” is  always construed to mean 
mandatoriness and not discretionary, ONOCHIE V. ODOGWU was relied upon inter alia. It 
was submitted that LSS court rules was sacrosanct and binding and that the matter should be 
heard within 12 days. They prayed the court to so ho ld. On issue two, it was contended that 
court cannot deliver judgement outside the time limit stipulated for the delivery of judgment. 
The cases of IFEZUE V. MBADUGHA (1984) 5 SC 79, ODI V. OSAFILE (1985) 1 
NWLR [1] 17, ALABI V. FBN & ANOR (2018) LPELR -46072. It was submitted that 
court of law cannot deliver judgment outside the limit of time stipulated for the delivery of 
judgment. On the third issue; it was contended that judgment delivered outside the time limit 
would best be a nullity and academic and t hat one could not build something on nothing and 
expect it to stand. The case of UAC LTD. V MACFOY (1962) AC 158, OWNER 
M/BASCO LINER 3 ADENIJI (1993) 2 NWLR [274] 202 among others were relied upon. 
It was submitted that since the time limit stipulated in O 22 R 5 had passed, a judgment 
delivered outside the time limit would best be a nullity and academic. The following reliefs 
were prayed for;  
AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT striking out or dismissing the suit for 
being fundamentally defective and outsi de the jurisdictional competency of this honourable 
court.  
AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT mandating the claimant to pay the sum of 
N1,500 (one thousand five hundred naira) for cost of filing this suit. AND FOR SUCH 
OTHER ORDERS AND DECLARATIONS THIS CO URT SHALL DEEM FIT ON THE 
CIRCUMSTANCE OF THIS CASE In their reply, claimant couched three issues;  
• Whether or not the word “shall” as mentioned on O22 R5 of LSS court rules connotes 
mandatoriness?  
• Whether or not a court of law will strictly follow it s court rules to subservient substantial 
justice?  
• Whether or not technicality can override substantial justice?  
On the first issue; it was contended and submitted that the word “shall” did not always mean 
mandatoriness particularly where it was used in  the court rules. The case G. OFODILE OKAFOR 
OON SAN V. PDP (2014) AELR 4050  among others were cited. On the second issue; it was 
contended and submitted that court will not deviate from substantive justice to follow its court rules, the 
case of AFOLABI V. ADEKUNLE (1983) ANLR was relied on. On the third issue; it was contended 
and submitted that technicality cannot subservient substantial justice but court can subservient 
technicality in order to deal with substantive justice. The case of WASSAN V. KARA (2015) 4 NWLR 
[1449] was cited. They pray that this honourable court should discountenance with the PO of the 
defendants. Defendant counsels replied on point of law that the ADEKUNLE‟S case was in respect of 
amendment of pleading but their objection was on j urisdiction. Upon listen to the parties on the PO, the 
honourable court proceeds to give its ruling on the PO. The court adopts the issues as couched by the 
counsels to claimant. The issues are; 1. Whether or not the word “shall” as mentioned on O22 R5 of 
LSS court rules connotes mandatoriness? 2. Whether or not a court of law will strictly follow its court 

10 | P a g e  
 
rules to subservient substantial justice? 3. Whether or not technicality can override substantial justice? 
On the first issue, defendant counsel contend ed that the provisions of court rules are sacrosanct and 
binding at all situations, the case of G. M. O. NWORAH & SONS CO. LTD. AFAM AKPATA 
(2019) 9 NWLR [1200] 443  was cited to the effect that court rules must be obeyed. Claimant counsel 
argued that “shall” is always not interpreted as mandatoriness. G. OFODILE OKAFOR OON SAN V. 
PDP (2014) AELR 4050  was cited. The main issue to be tried is the duration of entertaining a case 
before LSS court. It is the provision of our constitution by section 35(6) that “T he judiciary shall 
commence proceedings within one week upon receipt of any matter and dispose of same within 
REASONABLE TIME” [emphasis supplied] It is trite law that statutes are not to be interpreted in 
isolation but holistic interpretation should be de ployed. See the case of AKINTOLA v. LSS ISEC 
(SUPRA) @ 27. In interpreting the reasonableness of the time, it has been determined by O 22 R 5 LSS 
Court (Civil Procedure) Rules, 2019 that; “Every suit filed before the court SHALL be heard, 
determined and fully dispensed with WITHIN 12 DAYS OF THE COMMENCEMENT” [em phasis 
supplied] By the provision of the section 6 of LSS constitution, day; “Means a day during which the 
school is in session save public holidays and work -free days” [emphasis supplied] The implication of 
the section 6 is that Saturday, Sundays and public holidays will not be considered in counting the 12 day 
of commencement of the proceeding. The instance case commenced on Monday, 2nd of Dec. 2019 and 
the 12th day will be Tuesday, 17th of Dec. 2019 which was the day after the day of filing this PO and 
the day of entertaining the PO. The two Saturdays and Sundays in between the days are not considered 
because they are work -free day within the University. Till now, I cannot find the rationale behind the 
PO filed by the defendant when the time limit stipula ted has not elapsed. It is a disheartened act for the 
parties to outsmart not the even the other party but the court in order to bring the case to an end. It sends 
a signal that defendant is not ready to defend themselves or they do not have any defence ag ainst the 
claim before the court. This kind of practice is shameful and unprofessional in our jurisdiction. 
Assuming but not conceding that the time limit has lapsed, what will be the fate of the case and the 
claimant? Will the word “shall” be given its na tural meaning in this context? What is even the natural 
meaning of “Shall” in this context? O 22 R 5 of LSS Court (Civil Procedure) Rules 2019 states the time 
limit of the proceeding with the connotation of “SHALL”. In the galaxy of authorities, the primar y 
implication of “SHALL” in any provision is mandatoriness, compulsion and obligation. See the case of 
DAGBO V. FIN. SEC. HUMAN RIGHT CHAMBER (2019) 1 LSSCLR 101 @ 111 -112. However, 
to determine whether or not a word will have mandatory effect, recourse is  mostly made to the context 
of the usage and the implication of not complying with the provision of the law. see AJADI HUSSEIN 
KEHINDE V. LORD ACTIVIST, HUMAN RIGHT CHAMBER LSSJ/001/2020 and AJEWOLE 
V. SPEAKER, LSS HOUSE OF REP (2019) 1 LSSCLR 155 @ 164.  Apart from the general position 
of the law above, there are exceptions to this general rule that; 1. Where the mandatory words are 
contained in the rules of court and the demand of justice dictates a permissive application. 2. Where 
other provisions of an enactment or written document show that compliance with such mandatory words 
can be waive or that they should be applied permissively. In the above two cases, the word “SHALL” 
will be construed as discretionary or permissive.  See AJEWOLE SAMUEL V. SPEAKER, LSS 
HOUSE OF REP (2019) (supra) and SESAN V. JUDICIARY, LSS (2019) 1 LSSCLR 69 @ 80 . In 

11 | P a g e  
 
the instance case, the location of the provision relied on which defines reasonable time contains in the 
LSS constitution is in LSS Court Rules. This implies that the w ord “SHALL” may be interpreted as 
permissive and not mandatoriness but subject to demand of justice. On the demand of justice, it is not 
only within the knowledge of the court but also in the knowledge of the parties including the whole 
society that the av ailable days for the LSS court to entertain any case is not more than three days in a 
week, this is due to indigenous activities, chambers meeting and associations meeting that do happen at 
the various classes at the time that court supposes to sit. The is sue of venue for court sitting does not 
start this year but it has been happening over the years. Also, those days that court cannot sit are also 
being counted as part of the 12 days stipulated in the court rules because they are not work -free days as 
defines by LSS constitution. The essence of pegging the days at 12 is to put every party on their toes 
including the court to ensure that much time is not spent on particular case while there other cases 
begging for hearing. The essence is not to occasion injustice to any party. In the history of this case, it is 
not the fault of any party that the case cannot be hear and dispense with within the stipulated time 
because every party has been diligent enough with the case. It will be unsaved to say that 12 days h as 
elapsed and the case should be struck out when there is no fault from any ends whatsoever to justify 
that. Striking out the case will occasion injustice to the claimant who has eschewed violent and 
approaches the court to vent his grievance for possible  reliefs. On the position of laws and the analyses, 
it is just and right to interpret “SHALL” contained in the LSS Court Rules in O 22 R 5 as permissive 
and not mandatoriness. In that regard, this honourable court hereby holds the PO is too unripe and 
frivolous for the reason that the 12th day of the proceeding has not elapsed before it was filed. Court 
also holds that interpreting “SHALL” as mandatory in this context will occasion injustice and as such 
same is interpreted as permissive and discretionary. O n the second issue, defendants‟ counsels argued 
that court rules are sacrosanct and binding. The case of MISS EZEANAH V. ALH. ATTA 
MAMOUD (2004) 7 NWLR [873] 468 @ 502  was cited but claimant counsels contended that court 
would not follow its rules where it would occasion injustice. AFOLABI V. ADEKUNLE (1983) ANLR 
was cited. In the case of USMAN v. TAMADENA & CO. LTD. (2015) LPELR -40376 PER ABBA 
AJI JCA  held that; “rules of court are purposely made to be obeyed and followed, therefore all 
procedure set by th e rules must be complied with, however, where in the course of following the rules 
some errors or mistake are committed or omitted, such error or mistakes would not be out rightly render 
the proceedings a nullity. Depending on the circumstance of each part icular case, where the non 
compliance has occasioned miscarriage of justice or where the right of the adverse party will be 
affected, the court shall not treat the non -compliance as a mere irregularity and as such mandate the 
rules to be followed or nullif y the proceedings as the case may be. But in a situation where it has not 
occasioned miscarriage of justice it shall be treated as mere irregularity and should not vitiate the 
proceedings. This is because all rules of Court are made in aid of justice and t hat being so, the interest 
of justice will have to be given priority over any rules, compliance of which will lead to outright 
injustice. The rules are not sine quo non in the determination of a case and therefore not immutable. See 
Oni V. FAYEMI (2008) 8 NWLR [1089] 408. In ABUBAKAR V. YAR’ADUA (2008) 4 NWLR 
[1078] 465@ 510 paras G -H, the Supreme Court held inter alia that „it is not every non -compliance 
with rules of court that vitiate the proceedings or do harm to the party in default. As a matter of our  

12 | P a g e  
 
adjectival law, and by the state of the non -compliance rules, the courts will regard certain acts or 
conduct of non-compliance as mere irregularity which could be waived in the interest of justice. Again, 
as a matter of position of our adjectival law, non -compliance rules in their aggregate content point more 
to this trend than the reverse position of a punitive nature against the non -complying party. The state of 
the law is more in favour of forgiving non -compliance with rules of court, particularly where  such non-
compliance , if waived will be in the interest of justice…rules of court is rules of court and cannot be 
accorded a status of statutory provisions. As mandatory rules of court and are not as sacrosanct as 
mandatory statutory provisions. Courts of  justice are more inclined to regard as directory or permissive 
any provision in the rules of court which appears mandatory, if it is implicit in the provision in question 
or if the ends of justice demands that it is so construed”.  See also KATTO V CBN (19 91) 9 NWLR 
[214] 126, ODOFIN V. ONI (2001) 17 NWLR [701] 488 @ 501, IBIECHEFU GOV. IMO ST. 
(2008) 12 NWLR [1106] 22, AJEWOLE SAMUEL V. SPEAKER LSS HOUSE OF REPS (2019) 1 
LSSCLR, The implication of the above position is that rules of court are directions an d guidelines that 
are purposefully made to ensure smooth drive of vehicle to the destination of justice. The rationale 
behind every court rules is justice, any interpretation or application that will be counter -productive will 
be jettisoned for interest of  justice. It implies that interest of justice should always be considered in 
cases of contravention of court rules.  In the instance case, LSS constitution states that cases should be 
heard within reasonable time and LSS court rules defines the reasonable t ime to mean 12 days with the 
believe that parties should have been heard substantially on merit before that days elapse and that justice 
will have been done within that period. Although, the days is still counting as at the time of delivering 
this ruling b ut it will make no different even if the days has elapsed because the case has not been 
substantially heard, let alone justice being done to it. In as much as the case has not been heard on merit, 
the court is not bound to comply with the 12days stipulatio n in the Court Rules because Court Rules 
should not be followed to occasion miscarriage of justice and that the reasonable time stipulation in the 
LSS constitution has not been met. This honourable court hereby holds that Court Rules should be 
obeyed but n ot to the extent of miscarriage of justice. This is settled in favour of the claimant and 
against the defendant. On the third issue, defendants‟ counsel contended that court rules should be 
followed and sympathy cannot override the clear provisions of the Rules of Court. The case of ALABI 
V. FIRST BANK OF NIGERIA PLC & ANOR (2018) LPELR -40672 (CA) was cited and 
claimant‟s counsels argued that court is meant to do substantive justice and not technical justice, they 
relied on the case of WASSAN V. KARA (2015)  4 NWLR [1449]. In the case of DANGOTE GEN. 
TEXTILE PRODUCTS LTD & ORS V. HASCON ASSOCIATES NIG. LTD & ANOR (2013) 
AELR 1730 SC; per Ogunbiyi JSC  held thus “The concept of justice is the backbone and life wire of 
a peaceful co-existence in any given society and it cannot therefore be under estimated. A just society is 
an embodiment of God‟s Attribute and as the Holy Scripture put it: „God‟s throne is built on justice and 
righteousness‟. Technicality should not therefore be used to erode or sacrifice justice  on the altar of 
procedure.” In the case of NISHIZAWA V. JETHWANI (1984) ALL NLR 470, per ANIAGOLU 
JSC (as he then was), held that “While appreciating the need for procedural requirements to be obeyed, 
the ultimate dictates of justice must override nigglin g technicalities.” In MBAS MOTEL LTD. V. 
WEMA BANK PLC (2013) AELR 1813 CA per ABIRU JCA  held while appraising the important of 

13 | P a g e  
 
justice that “We must never lose sight of the fact that justice is rooted in public confidence and it is 
essential to social ord er and security. It is the bond of society and the cornerstone of human 
togetherness. Justice is the condition in which the individual is able to identify with society, feel at one 
with it and accept its rulings. The moment members of the society lose conf idence in the system of 
administration of the justice, a descent to anarchy begins.” The above positions of law are pointing to no 
direction but that justice is most significant and important tenet of any s ociety. It implies that in any 
case or matter before the court, an average or reasonable human being in the court must hold strong 
view that justice has been done to all parties in the case. The justice in question can be of different 
kinds, it can be Subs tantive Justice, Procedural Justice or Technical Justice. While court must always 
observe the first two kinds of justices, it must be conscious of technical justice because it usually 
slaughters the ultimate justice which is substantive justice. See the ca se of DAGBO V. FIN. SEC. 
HUMAN RIGHT CH. (supra). It is also the duty of court to ensure that technical justice is not dressed 
in the garment of procedural justice and vice versa. This is due to the thin line of demarcation between 
the two types of justice . see SESAN v. JUDICIARY LSS (supra) pg. 72  Even, procedural justice at 
times is sacrifice for substantial justice in warranting situation, this is because the ultimate and golden 
goal for establishment of court as administration of justice is to ensure th at substantial justice has been 
done. Substantial justice can only be done when rights and liabilities of each party in a specific case has 
been substantially settled and resolved. See OMOJU V. FRN (2008) AELR 3109 (SC) AND 
AKINGBOLA & ANOR V. INTERCONTINE NTAL BANK PLC & ORS (2014) AELR 3107 
(CA) The instance case has not gone beyond mentioning stage when the defendants‟ counsels filed PO 
to effect that time-limit for hearing the case has elapsed even when the time is still counting. Neither the 
right nor t he liabilities of any parties have been determined by the court. Even if the time -limit of the 
case has reached, the law that states the time limit is the LSS court rules while LSS constitution states 
that the case should be hear within reasonable time. As  it is held earlier court rules cannot be followed 
to crash the plane of substantial justice. Any procedural defect or non -compliance against court rules 
will not be taken as cogent except same will occasion injustice to any party. It is evident that this PO is 
purposefully meant to armed rob the case from being heard substantially because it is filed so early to 
showcase the intention of defendant in technical justice. Likewise, the continuation of the case will not 
cause any injustice to defendants at any  stretch of imagination, not even on the basis that stipulation of 
time in the LSS court rules has elapsed, LSS constitution envisages that substantial justice can only be 
done within reasonable time. The reasonableness of time can only be determined when all rights and 
liabilities has been settled substantially in the mind of reasonable person in the society and not 12 days 
stipulation in the LSS court rules which in this case has not aided substantial justice. It is then saved to 
hold that the PO is based  on technical ground which does not serve any purpose except to breach the 
trust and confidence of LSSites in LSS court in ensuring substantial justice. Our court is not court of 
technicality but court of law for the administration of substantial justice, any technical attempt to 
subservient substantial justice will meet door of our court close at all time because there is no room for 
technicality in our jurisdictional building. This honourable court hereby holds that technical justice will 
not be allowed t o subservient substantial justice. And that this court still has jurisdiction to continue 
hearing the case. All issues in this ruling are settled in favour of the claimant and against the defendants. 

14 | P a g e  
 
The PO is hereby dismissed for lacking of merit. After delivering this ruling, defendants applied for stay 
of proceeding to exercise their right of appeal and same was granted. On 8th of Jan, 2020, defendant 
filed a motion on notice to vacate the order of stay of proceeding. The application was filed alongside 
defendant statement of defence. On 13th of Jan. 2020, this application was duly adopted before this 
honourable court. On that day, Claimant counsel pleaded the following documents to support his case; 
Certificate of Electronically generated documents, Post of contribution and commendation of the of one 
Anonymous, Post of declaration of the winner by the defendants, Post of contribution and 
commendation of one Hauwa, Post of request for the participation, Post of Acknowledgement of 
Interest of the participat ion, Post of call for submission of the answers, post of promise of rewards for 
the winner, post of assessment of results, post of response to submission of answers, written statement 
on oath of Issa Habeebullah and written statement of on oath of Miss Kol awole Islamiyat Oyindamola. 
They were all marked Ex. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12 respectively. Claimant also called one 
witness alongside himself testifying to the fact of this case. Mr. Issa Habeebullah adopted his statement 
on oath. Miss Ko lawole Islamiyat Oyindamola here called claimant witness (CW) also adopted her 
written statement on oath before the court where she testified to the fact that a competition was stage 
within their level and that Claimant in this case did participate in this  competition which was assessed 
and marked by the 1st defendant. She also testified that defendants declared the claimant the winner of 
the competition and that there were promises for the winner of the competition. Therefore, Claimant 
closed his case. On 23rd of Jan, 2020, Defendants opened their defence with the pleading of Certificate 
of Electronically generated documents that is marked Ex A1. 1st Defendant was called to adopt his 
written statement on oath but an objection was raised against that because  of discrepancy in the copies 
before the court and the ones with claimant. Later on, 1st Defendant withdrew his written statement on 
oath. Thereafter, 2nd defendant was also called upon to adopt his written statement on oath and he did 
adopt it. In the written statement on oath, 2nd defendant stated that there was quiz competition that was 
organized by 1st defendant and him. The terms of the competition were also stated for the potential 
participants. He stated that claimant did participate in the competiti on and that there was statement of 
result of the competition which did not proclaim any winner of the competition. He stated that the 
contribution acclaimed in this suit was not meant for the competition in question. He lastly stated that 
the suit debased his person and undignified his image. During cross examination, it was revealed that 
there were two results regarding the outcome of the competition. In re -examination, it was known that 
the first posted result which claimant based his case on was marked b y one barrister and solicitor of 
Supreme Court of Nigeria, the name of whom was only known by the 1st Defendant. Thereafter, 
defendants reassessed the results and posted another result after the commencement of this case. 2 nd 
defendant said that ISSA HABE EBULLAH had the highest score in the first result and OLUSEGUN 
OBALOLUWA was the highest scorer in the second result.  On the 24 of Jan. 2020, Defendants counsel 
sought an application for the recalling of 1st Defendant while relying on the following authori ties 
section 200 CPA, Ogbodu V Ogoga (1976) NMLR 400. Jeffcom Global Integrated V. Emerging 
Marketing (2018) LPELR 44916. Claimant raised an objection to the application while relying on 
Bassey V. Ekanem (2001) 1 NWLR [694] 376 . This honourable hereby rule d thus “It is trite that an 
application can be moved for recalling of a witness for clarification of existing evidence before the 

15 | P a g e  
 
court. See the case of JEFFCOM GLOBAL INTEGRATED V. EMERGING MARKETING (2018) 
LPELR 44916. In the case of ONWUKA V. OWOLEWA (2001) 7 NWLR [713] 695, it was held that 
a witness can only be recalled subject to the consent of the parties. See also OMOREGBEE V. 
LAWANI (1980) 3-4 SC 108: ELENDU V EKWOABA (1998) 12 NWLR (PT.578) 320; ELENDU 
V. EKWOABA (1995) 3 NWLR (PT.386) 704 REFERRE D TO.](P.713, PARAS. E -F). However, 
where there is an objection to the application of recalling of witness, the court will rule that the witness 
cannot be recalled without the other side consenting to it. See the case of DICKSON OJIEGBE 
ANOR. V MARCUS UBANI ANOR. (1961) ALLN.L.R. 277. Thereby the application is not granted. 
Defendants counsel later moved another application for the recalling 2nd defendant but claimant put it 
at the discretion of the court. In the interest of justice, the second application was allowed. Defendant 
pleaded the following documents, Certificate of Electron ically generated documents of 2 nd defendant, 
copy of post of winners of quiz to wit Anonymous and Hauwa Usman‟s contribution was divested, copy 
of correspondence between 1st def endant and Anonymous and Post of impeding release of result on 
10th January 2020 which were marked Ex A3, 4, 5 and 6 respectively. Other documents tendered were 
post of final result from which winners were selected and post of result to wit anonymous and H auwa 
Usman‟s contributions were divested which were marked “tendered but not admitted”. The final status 
of these two documents will determine later in this judgment. On the 27th of Jan. 2020, parties file their 
final addressed and same were adopted before  this honourable court. Claimant couched three issues in 
his final written address as thus; i. Whether or not there is a valid contract between/promise between the 
claimant and defendants? ii. Whether or not a probative value would be attached to an exhibi t tendered 
but not relevant? iii. Whether or not a person can approbate and at the same time reprobate? On the first 
issue, claimant contended and submitted that there is valid between claimant and defendants. The case 
of Total Nig. PLC V. New Cargo Handli ng Co. (2015) 17 NWLR [1489] 579, Muhammed v. 
Muhammed & Anor (2011) LPELR 3729 (CA)  were cited. Claimant also referred court to EX. 2, 3, 
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 of the claimant. On issue two, it was contended and submitted that court should 
not attached probative value to exh. A4 and A6 of the defendant that was not relevant. The case of 
Justus Nwobuoku & ORS V. Francis ONwodi &ORS SC. 344/2001  was relied upon. On the last 
issue, claimant vehemently contended and submitted as the same that defendant shoul d be not be 
allowed to approbate and reprobate at the same time. Claimant relies on High tree case, Iga v. Amokiri 
(1976) SC inter alia. On the whole, claimant urged the court to settle all the issues in his favour.  
Claimant sought the following prayers;  
A declaration of this honourable court that the promise made by the defendants are enforceable.  
An order of this honourable court mandating the defendants to pay the sum of (One thousand Five 
Hundred Naira) N1500.00 worth of airtime and a plate of item7 as promise by the defendants.  
An order of this honourable court mandating the defendants to pay the sum of (Ten thousands Naira) 
N10,000.00 as the cost of this litigation.  
And other orders as this honourable court may deem fit to make in the circumstance of this case.  

16 | P a g e  
 
On the other side, Defendant couched four issues in their final written address as thus; 
i. Whether or not the terms of a contract are binding?  
ii. Whether or not court can make contract for the parties?  
iii. Whether a result which is not final can be a conclusive prove of who the winner is?  
iv. Whether considering the stack of evidence and facts before this court, the claimant has a case 
which is not academic?  
Defendant contended on the issue 1 that terms of the  contract are binding on the parties. The case of 
Obanye V. UBN LPELR -44702 (SC) iner alia. He further contended that intention of parties are 
knows via the deed of agreement or relevant documents. He submitted that claimant did agree to the 
term of the c ontract that „…winner shall be selected on the basis of the adequate knowledge of law, 
proper application of legal principles and arguments.” And that same should be bound on him. 
Reference was made to copy of the post of quiz announcement and testimony of  Claimant and CW. On 
issue 2, Defendants contended and submitted that court cannot make contract for the parties. The case 
of Osesa V. Tulip Cocoa Processing ltd. LPELR -45003 inter alia was cited. On the issue3, it was 
contended that a result that is not c onclusive cannot be conclusive proof of who the winner is. Faleke 
v. INEC & ANor (SC. 648/2016) [2016] NGSC 84  was cited inter alia. On issue 4, Defendants 
contended and submitted on the case of claimant case had become academic. The case of AG Plateau 
V. AG Fed. (2006) 3 NWLR [967] 346 at 419 was cited. Counsel also referred to Ex A6 and DW2. 
Defendants submitted on the whole that all these issues should be settled in their favour. They pray for 
the following relief;  
A declaration of this honourable court that the claimant has no basis to be granted his claim and thus be 
struck for being baseless and abuse of court process.  
A declaration of this honourable court that this suit is academic and devoid of any life or breath issue 
and should be dismissed.  
An order of this honourable court mandating the claimant to pay the sum of 15,000.00 (fifteen thousand 
naira only) as general damages for subjecting the 2nd defendant to indignity and embarrassment.  
An order of this honourable court mandating the claimant t o pay cost of filing this suit as determined 
N5000 And other orders as this honourable court may deem fit to make in the circumstance of this case.  
WHETHER OR NOT CLAIMANT IS THE WINNER OF ALL TRAILBLAZERS 48HRS 
ONLINE QUIZ COMPETITION?  
To start with, the fact of the case revolves around an exchange of promises between defendants and the 
participants of the competition. There is no doubt that claimant in this case was also one of the 
participants of the said competition. This was made cle ar in paragraph 1, 2, and 3 of statement of claim 
of claimant and same was considerably admitted by the defendants in their statement of defence by 
paragraph 1 and 2. Ex 6, claimant written statement on oath, testimony of CW, EXA 2, inter alia 

17 | P a g e  
 
corroborated these facts. It is trite law of evidence, that fact admitted need not be proven. See section 
123 of Evidence Act 2011, SESAN V. JUDICIARY LSS supra . It is the basic principle of law that 
whenever there is an exchange of promises which has led to agreement  between persons for the 
performance of a certain activity(ies), the strong pillars of valid contract such as offer, acceptance and 
consideration will have been established in that case. And it will be case of valid contract, should there 
be any breach of duty, the aggrieved person can maintain action for redress before any court of law 
with jurisdiction. See the case of ISIYAKU V. ZWINGINA (2003) 6 NWLR [PT. 817] 560, 
JADESIMI V. EGBE (2003) 10 NWLR [PT. 827] 1, ALADE V. ALIC (2010) 19 NWLR [PT. 
1226] 111. It seems to me that both parties understand this basic principle of contract because either of 
them has performed their contractual duties prima facie but what need to be considered is whether the 
performance of duty is rightly and properly channel to ri ght persons and places. This is necessary 
because claimant averted that by virtue of a result posted on 28th day of September 2019, he should be 
the winner of the competition. Defendants averted to the contrary that a winner had been selected via 
another result that was posted on 12th day of January, 2020 and that the person had been rewarded in 
accordance with terms of the competition. Both averments were made respectively in statement of 
claim of claimant and statement of defence of defendants. The releva nt question now is “WHO IS 
TRULY THE LEGAL WINNER OF ALL TRAILBLAZERS 48HRS ONLINE COMPETITION 
2019”? Before answering this question, I want to quickly state that there are two documents (titled Post 
of announcement of winner of the quiz competition on 12th day of January 2020 and Post of final result 
from which winner were selected) tendered by the defendants. But they were marked “tendered but not 
admitted”. The basis for rejecting this evidence was premised on the testimony of 2nd defendant that 
the document was issued during the pendency of this case. Likewise, the date of production of such 
documents which was 12th day of January, 2020 revealed that the document was prepared while the 
case was on going and it was prepared by interested person who was 2n d defendant. By virtue of 
section 83 (3) of Evidence Act 2011,  any statement made in document by any person interested at a 
time when proceedings were pending or anticipating shall be render inadmissible. Also, His Lordship 
Lokulo-Sodipe JCA in the case of MR. CHIKE ORJIEKWE ANOR V. MRS. NGOZI ORJIEKWE 
ANOR (2012) AELR 1601 (CA)  held that “the authorities are at one that document made by a person 
interested when proceedings are anticipating or pending are inadmissible in civil proceeding”. See also 
NIGERIA SOCIAL INSURANCE TRUST FUND MANAGEMENT BOARD V. KLIFCO 
NIGERIA LTD (2010) ALL FWLR [PT. 5344] 73 . Except the maker of that document is an expert 
who make the document in the ordinary course of his profession, such statement in document will be 
regarded as merely expert opinion and not a hard fact upon which cause of action has been based. See 
the case of OWENA BANK PLC V. M. O. OLANTUNJI & ORS (2002) FWLR PT. 124 @ 529, 
GBADAMOSI V. KABO TRAVLES LTD (2000) 8 NWLR [668] 243 @ 276 -280. Ex A3 of 
defendants sho wed that the maker of the said documents was the 2nd defendant who was person 
interested in this case. Likewise, the content of the document was not an expert opinion but fact that 
was capable of swaying the decision of this honourable court anyway. On thi s basis, the documents 
were rendered inadmissible. It is important to point out that EX A6 which was admitted at the trial of 
this case, was also made during the continuance of proceeding. Inadvertently, it was wrongly admitted 

18 | P a g e  
 
in evidence. However, sectio n 251 of Evidence Act 2011 empowers court to expunge any wrongful 
admitted evidence from record. Like other documents, EX A6 is peacefully thrown out of the record of 
this court into the bimodal triangle as if it does not exist in the record of this court.  Back to the main 
question of who is the winner of the competition. It is quite cleared that sometimes around September, 
a result was posted which indicated individual scores of participants. The highest score in that result 
belonged to the claimant in thi s case which was not denied by the defendants. This is deducible from 
content of Ex 3 of claimant and 2nd defendant testimony. Although, it was inscribed in the notice of 
that result as thus “THIS IS THE RESULT FOR THE CONCLUDED ALL TRAILBLAZERS‟ 
ONLINE QU IZ COMPETITION 2019”, but defendants had contended that the result posted around 
September 2019 was not conclusive result of the competition because as the organizer, they have to 
reanalysis the result. They based their assertion on the term of competition  that read thus “…winners 
shall be selected on the basis of adequate knowledge of law, proper application of legal principle and 
arguments." They further contended that the implication of the above term was that winners should be 
selected by the organizers . This line of contention is interestingly funny because the defendants who 
were the organizers of the competition were well abreast with this term of the competition before they 
released the first result of the competition in September 2019. If at all, th ey had intention not to make 
the result final, a notice of awareness should have accompanied the released result. Reasonably, the 
moment the result had been posted, any reasonable person would have believed that the organizers had 
done whatever was expecte d of them and that was the concluded result for the concluded competition 
because there was no fact contrariwise. If this honourable court should align with the position of the 
defendants that the first result is not final, defendant will have been allowed  to use term of competition 
to perpetrate injustice simply because they are the organizers of the competition. As much as equity 
will not allow statute to be used for fraud same way it will not allow term of contract to be swayed 
capriciously when that wil l lead to injustice. See the case of ATTA V. EZEANAH (2000) 11 NWLR 
363, BANNISTER v. BANNISTER (1949) All ER 133  inter alia. Again, if this honourable court 
should wine and dine with position of the defendants on the first result, defendants will have bee n 
allowed to blow hot and cold, approbating and reprobating at the same time which is fundamentally 
against the doctrine of estoppels. See LATEEF TIAMIYU V. LASISI ENIOLA OLAOGUN (2009) 
9 WRN 68 @ 89,  section 169 of Evidence Act 2011  states thus; “When a p erson has either by virtue 
of an existing judgment, deed or agreement, or by his declaration. Act, omission, intentionally caused 
or permitted another person to believe a thing to be true and to act upon such belief, neither he nor his 
representatives in interest shall be allowed, in any proceeding between himself and such person or such 
person‟s representative in interest, to deny the truth of that thing”. The defendants‟ act of posting the 
result created the belief that such result should be regarded as t he final because there was nothing that 
could be shown to the contrary. So, they are hereby enstopped by the rule of estoppels and the doctrine 
of equity to contend that the first result was not final. Assuming but not conceding that the first result 
was posted when the organizers were still working on it, it would be believed that they have slept on 
their right saved the case of notice of inconclusiveness, plea of fraud or any considerable reasons. 
Either of these exceptions is not available in this case. Per Orji Abadua JCA said in the case of 
NAFDAC V. MR. EUGINE S. ONWUKA (2013) AELR 3002 (CA)  that; “it is elementary law that 

19 | P a g e  
 
the rules or principles of equity help only the vigilant and they do not assist an indolent party who fails 
to pursue his right diligently and within a reasonable time. Where this happened, the Courts regard such 
delay or indolence of the party either as fatal to his case or as amounting to a waiver of his right under 
the maxim that equity helps only the vigilant…” The defendants in this case had all the right and power 
to do whatever they wanted to do with the result in accordance with term of the competition but they 
failed to do that within reasonable time. Defendants havd not been vigilant enough because they only 
woke up from slu mbering after more than three months when the competition had been concluded. 
Equity does not side person who is not diligent enough in observing their right. It is hereby saved at 
this juncture to hold that this court discountenances with contention of th e defendants that the first 
result posted around September was not final. The next important thing to be determined is the actual 
winner of the competition. In competition like this, the winner is known by the scores of various 
participants, any person wit h the highest score is regarded as the winner of the competition. Although, 
defendant contended that no winner had been declared despite the release of scores of the participants. 
Let‟s take a look at these two scenarios, if there are two football teams pl aying a football match. After 
blowing the final whistle, team A is leading team B with two goals to nil. Every spectator will surely 
know that team A is the winner of the competition upon the blowing of final whistle. No doubt, trophy 
will be given to the team with highest score. In another case, in a league competition among team of 
football clubs, if the team at the top has acquired so much points that even if the team does not gain any 
additional point from the remaining matches, it will still be at the top of the league. Before officially 
announcing the winner, every fan and spectator of such football league will have no doubt that the team 
at the top is the winner of the league. The driving force for this assurance is premised on the fact that 
winner of  any competition is the person or team with the highest score. In that case, special 
announcement of the winner is just a ceremonial exercise that does not change the fact that winner is 
always given to the highest scorer. In this case, the first posted re sult of the concluded online quiz 
competition enlisted various participants with their individual scores. See Ex 3 of the claimant. Like in 
the above scenarios, the result showed that there was a person with highest score and there was person 
with lowest s core. Without the ceremonial announcement of winner, the winner had been know 
because res ipsa liquitor and Equity looks as done that which ought to be done. In the case of 
MALLAM MALA GADZAMA & ANOR V. COLONEL GARBA ADAMU & ORS (2014) AELR 
5862; Per Tur J CA said “Equity looks on that as done which ought to be done…This maxim has its 
most frequent application in the case of contracts. Equity treats a contract to do a thing as if the thing 
were already done…” The fact that the first result had enlisted a per son with highest score, equity will 
regard that posting of the result as the act of declaring the highest scorer, the winner of the competition. 
2nd defendant testified before this honourable court that the person that had highest score in the first 
result released in September 2019 was Claimant. This testimony was corroborated with Ex6 of 
claimant. At this juncture, the contention of the defendant that no one could claim the winner of the 
competition after releasing first result in September 2019 is discountenanced with. This is because there 
is no admissible fact/evidence that clearly shows that the result is inconclusive and pending. Also, there 
is no other legitimate result that changes the fact in the first result. Therefore, the claimant who had the 
highest score in the first result is deemed the winner of the competition and claimant is hereby declared 

20 | P a g e  
 
the winner of the competition. This Honourable Court settles this suit against the defendants and in 
favour of the claimant. Before the court will rise,  I want to say that I salute the courage and 
sportsmanship of the parties and counsels in this case. They have taken this Honourable Court to the 
journey it hardly plies in history. I may not say in the past because there is no tracked record, this is 
first case to be commenced with writ of summon in my last three years of experience at the bench of 
LSS. This case has painted this Honourable Court another color beyond being a court of only 
interpretation of statute but also all other civil cases. It sends a  signal to general society that contractual 
matters, tortuous matter and civil dispute of any kind that degenerates within Law Students‟ Society as 
a jurisdiction and Law Students as persons within the University of Ilorin can legally be entertained by 
this Honourable Court. I must confess that every party in this case including judges has gained new 
skill and knowledge beyond the common litigation process in our jurisdiction. We wish to have more of 
this case in the future. These following prayers are granted;  
a. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the promises made by the defendants 
are enforceable.  
b. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT mandating and commanding the defendants to pay 
the sum of (One thousand five hundred Naira) N1,500.00 worth airt ime and plate of item7 as promised 
by the defendants. c. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT mandating and commanding the 
defendants to pay the sum of (One thousand five hundred) N1,500.00 as the cost of this litigation.  
d. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT  mandating and commanding the defendants to 
execute all orders in this judgment within ten working days starting from the day of this judgment.  
All other prayers that are not granted are deemed rejected  
HON JUDGE MUHAMMED SHUAIB OLADIMEJI  
I have the pri vilege to read in draft the lead judgment just delivered by my learned brother, 
ABDULKAREEM ABDURRAZZAQ KETU CJLSS. He has weighed the facts and applied the 
relevant laws that I am left in no doubt that he reached a very sound conclusion in the circumstanc es 
and I abide by the consequential orders made in the lead judgment.  
HON. JUDGE TUNJI-LAWAL LAWAL BOLAJI  
I had a preview of the lead judgment just delivered by my learned brother, ABDULKAREEM 
ABDURRAZZAQ KETU CJLSS, I am in agreement entirely with the r easoning and conclusion 
reached by him. I adopt all his reasoning and opinions as mine including the orders and declarations. 
APPEARANCES 
A. HABEEBULLAH (lead counsel) with M. T. ADAM, A. O. HABEEB, A. Y. ADEBAYO, N. O. 
OLAMIDE for claimant  

21 | P a g e  
 
AKANNI KAMALDEEN (lead counsel) with L. O OKWARA, A. TOMIWA, B. A. ABASS, H. G. 
EDUN, A. O. ALLI, K. O OLADOJA, R. A. YUSUF for the defendants 
 AMICI CUREA A. B. ABDULRAHEEM AGLSS, I. S. IBRAHIM, Q. A. ADEDIMEJI, A. P. 
GANIYU, H. K. ELEJA, H. T. USMAN, A. A. ABDULAZEEZ,  M. A. ABDULWAKEEL, M. O. 
EYITAYO  