1 | P a g e  
 
THE LIBERTY CHAMBERS & ANOR V THE 
EXECUTIVE PRESIDENT L.S.S. &2 ORS 
CITATION: (2020) LCELR 2020001 
In the Law Students’ Society Court Of Unilorin 
ON THE 6TH DAY OF JANUARY, 2020 
Suit No: LSSJ/002/2020 
Before Their Lordships: 
Hon. Judge Muhammed Shuaib OLadimeji JLSS (Presiding judge) 
Hon. Judge Tunji lawal Lawal JLSS 
Hon. Judge Muhammed Olatoyinbo JLSS  
 
 
Between; 
 
1. THE LIBERTY CHAMBERS 
2. THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, LIBERTY CHAMBERS 
Applicants 
and 
1. THE EXECUTIVE PRESIDENT, LSS 
2.  THE VICE PRESIDENT, LSS 
3. THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, LSS 
Respondents 
 
 
RATIO DECIDENDI 
1. AFFIDAVIT EVIDENCE  - NATURE OF CONTRADICTIONS IN AN AFFIDAVIT :  It 
should be stressed at this point that contradiction in the evidence of witness that will be 
fatal must be substantial. Minor contradiction which did not affect the credibility of 
witnesses may not be fatal. Contradiction must relate to the substance. This view is amply 

2 | P a g e  
 
predicated upon the trite and well settled principle, to the effect that material 
contradictions can only exist where a piece of evidence is totally at variance with the 
evidence especially pleaded on facts. Thus, minor discrepancies often exist in testimonies 
of witnesses who are ready and committed to tell the truth. Indeed, it's naturally human to 
sometimes err. See NWANKWO VS. OFOMATA (2009) 11 NWLR (Pt. 1153) 496 @ 
515 paragraphs A -D." Per SAULAWA, J.C.A. (Pp.40 -41, paras. G -D) - MR. HENRY 
OGBOMO v. MR. TOSAYE OGBOMO & ANOR 2014 Suit No: CA/B/128/201. - PER 
MUHAMMAD SHUAIB OLADIMEJI JLSS  
2. BURDEN OF PROOF - ON HOW TO DETERMINE THE BURDEN OF PROOF 
IN A CIVIL CASE -  Fatayi-Williams J.S.C. (as he then was) in the case of Mogagi & 
Others v Odofin & Others (1978) 4 SC 91 at 93 -95 gave the following guidelines: “In 
short, before a judge whom evidence is adduced by the parties before him in a civil case 
come to a decision as to which  evidence he accepts and which evidence he rejects, he 
should first of all put the totality of the testimony adduced by both parties  on that 
imaginary scale: he will put the evidence adduced  by the plaintiff on one side of the 
scale and that by the defendant  on the other side of the scale and weigh them together. 
He will then see which is heavier, not by the number of witnesses calle d  by each party, 
but the quality or the probative value of the testimony of those witnesses. This is what is 
meant when it is said that a civil case is decided on the balance of probabilities.” PER 
TUNJI-LAWAL LAWAL BOLAJI JLSS  
3. EVIDENCE - WHAT CONSTITUTE  OATH-TAKING; Oath taking goes beyond mere 
signing of the contents of the document before the person authorized to administer the 
oath. The concept of oath taking involves: The Deponent making a statement in writing. 
The document is taken to a commissioner  for oath or a person duly authorized to take the 
oaths, The Commissioner for oath requires the deponent to swear on a holy book 
particular to the deponent's faith or a mere declaration for a deponent, whose faith forbids 
him to swear. The commissioner for  oath then makes the deponent to verify what has 
been stated, He deponent afterwards signs in the presence of the Commissioner for oath 
who witnesses that the affidavit was sworn to in his presence.   PER MUHAMMED 
SHUAIB OLADIMEJI JLSS.  
4. MODE OF COMMENCEMENT OF AN ACTION - ON THE FUNDAMENTAL 
NATURE OF AN ORIGINATING PROCESS : The validity of the originating process 
in a proceeding before a Court is fundamental, as the competence of the proceeding is 
sine qua non to the legitimacy of any mode adopted  to initiate the suit. Failure to 
commence an action with a valid originating process goes to the root of the case and 
same makes the case incompetent and a nullity, Kida V. Ogunmola (2006) 13 NWLR (Pt. 
997) @ 384 PER Abdulquadir C.J.L.S.S (P.9) SALAM ABDULSALAM v. ADEDIMEJI 

3 | P a g e  
 
QAYYIM ABDUL-HAFEEZ & ANOR CITATION: (2019) LCELR 1819 – 008 - PER 
MUHAMMAD SHUAIB OLADIMEJI  JLSS. 
5. PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - FAILURE TO FILE A COUNTER AFFIDAVIT:  
I commend the case of B.E ORISAKWE & SON LTD & ANOR. VS AFRIBANK 
PLC (2012) AELR 1267 (CA), SUIT NO: CA/J/11/2005  where it was held that it is a 
trite principle of law that a party who fails to file a counter affidavit, reply or further and 
better in order to challenge or controvert the depositions in the affidavit in quest ion is 
deemed to have accepted the fact deposed to the affidavit in question. - PER 
OLATOYINBO MUHAMMAD JLSS. 
6. PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE  - ON THE ESSENCE OF PRELIMINARY 
OBJECTIONS : Preliminary objection is to challenge the competence of the Court to 
hear and determine the suit and not to challenge or determine issue(s).ZENITH BANK & 
ANOR v. OLIMPEX (NIG) LTD (2018) LPELR -45573(CA) ASIKPO & ANOR vs. 
GEORGE & ANOR (2012) LPELR -9330 (CA)  pg.13-14, - PER MUHAMMAD 
SHUAIB OLADIMEJI JLSS   
7. PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE  - ON WHETHER A PRELIMINARY 
OBJECTION REQUIRES AN AFFIDAVIT : Preliminary objection though usually 
bothers on questions of law, thus do not require affidavit. However where there's 
necessity for any fact to be proved for a preliminary objection to be duly sustained, then 
affidavit ought to be filed. This position was  given judicial attestation in the case of 
CONTRACT RESOURCE NIGERIA LTD. & ANOR. V. UNITED BANK FOR 
AFRICA PLC (2011) LPELR -SC.292/2003 where the Supreme Court held that 
"Preliminary objections are usually on Law consequently no affidavit is necessary, bu t 
where the need to produce or rely on facts becomes necessary an affidavit ought to be 
filed." PER RHODES -VIVOUR, J.S.C (P. 10, Paras. F -G) - PER MUHAMMED 
SHUAIB OLADIMEJI JLSS.  
8. RULES OF COURT  - ON THE NECESSITY TO COMPLY WITH THE RULES 
OF COURT : If Rules of court provide for a particular format for the commencement of 
action or taking out of any processes such as Brief of Argument, a party is bound to 
comply with the format, where it falls to do so, a court of law is entitled to hold that 
action or that  process is incompetent VINCENT AHMAD OCHEGBUDU V. 
BONIFACE AGBALA (2014) AELR 3465(CA) however where the mode of 
commencing such an action is not provided for in the court rules, the court has the 
inherent power to entertain an action commenced. - PER MUH AMMAD SHUAIB 
OLADIMEJI JLSS 

4 | P a g e  
 
9. WORDS AND PHRASES  - AFFIDAVIT ; Affidavit is simply a declaration on oath, a 
formal sworn statement of facts signed by the deponent and witnessed as to the veracity 
of the deposition's signature by the taker of the oath such as the commissioner for oaths, 
notary public or even a magistrate. Thus, Affidavit evidence is a statement of fact which 
the deponent swears to be true to the best of his knowledge, information or belief. See 
CHIEF CHUKWUMEKA ODUMEGU OJUKWU VS MISS STELLA ONY EADOR 
(1991) 7 NWLR (pt 203) 286 at 317. - PER MUHA MMAD SHUAIB OLADIMEJI 
JLSS  
10. WORDS AND PHRASES  - DEPONENT: A  deponent is a person who swears to a 
written statement or one who swears to an affidavit under the Evidence Act. In BUHARI 
V INEC (supra) TOBI JS C stated thus: "...a person who swears to a written statement 
under Paragraph 1(1)(b) of the Practice Directions or one who swears to an affidavit 
under the Evidence Act is known as a deponent; a person who testifies by deposition." - 
PER MUHAMMAD SHUAIB OLADIMEJI JLSS.  
11. WORDS AND PHRASES  - PRELIMINARY OBJECTION: Preliminary objection is 
an objection which is mostly raised to challenge the jurisdiction of the court to entertain 
the suit or appeal or to challenge the competence of the suit itself and where the 
determination of the preliminary objection determines the suit  or  appeal completely,  
then  the  business  of  the  Court  is  over  and  there  is  no  necessity  to  proceed  to  
determine  the  suit  or appeal  on  the  merit.  See ALLANAH  Vs.  KPOLOKWU  (2016)  
LPELR-40724  ( SC)  pg.  10 -11, paras. D - A - PER MUHAMMED SHUAIB 
OLADIMEJI JLSS.  
12. WORDS AND PHRASES  - RESOLUTION- According to Black‟s law dictionary it is 
the determination or decision, in regard to its opinion or intention, of a delibe rative or 
legislative body, public assembly, town council, board or directors or the like. Also a 
motion or formal proposition offered for adoption by such a body.  - PER 
OLATOYINBO MUHAMMAD JLSS. 
13. WORDS AND PHRASES  - FUNDAMENTAL HUMAN RIGHTS - Fundamental 
Human Rights are rights which stand above the ordinary laws of the land. Their 
sacredness cannot be overemphasized as they are in fact antecedents to human existence. 
It is on this ground that their protection and enforcement are guaranteed by the 
constitution. In RANSOME-KUTI VS ATTORNEY-GENERAL OF THE 
FEDERATION (1985) 7 NWLR (PT 6) 211 at 229 -231, it was held that fundamental 
rights have been enshrined in the constitution so that they could be inalienable and 
immutable to the extent of non immutability of the constitution itself.  See also 
CHROME INSURANCE BROKERS LTD & ORS VS  EFCC& ORS (2018) 

5 | P a g e  
 
LPELR-44818(CA).  And Section 7(5) of the LSS constitution.  - PER 
OLATOYINBO MUHAMMAD JLSS.  
 
 
LEAD JUDGMENT DELIVERED BY HON. MUHAMMED SHUAIB JLSS 
 The fact of the case herein can be compressed as follows; 
The 1st applicant is a chamber established by the constitution of Law Students‟ Society and the 
2nd applicant is Attorney general of the 1st applicant. The respondents are the executive president, 
vice president and attorney general of the Law Students‟ Society respectively. On 4 th of 
November, 2019, the 1 st respondent and other member of the executive council summoned a 
meeting which includes heads of chambers and associations which has the aim see king opinion 
on possible harmonization of the faculty tutorial. It was on this round the applicants felt 
threatened and approached the court by notice of application for order enforcing a fundamental 
right brought pursuant to order 2 rule 1of Fundamental R ights‟ (enforcement procedure) rules 
2019 which was dated 28 th of November, 2019 claiming the following reliefs against the 
defendant: 
I. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the restriction of tutorial in the faculty 
to the LSS Academic Committee establish ed by section 43(1) of the LSS Constitution 
2018 as amended and headed by the vice -president is illegal and against fundamental 
Human Right 
II. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the resolution reached on the 4 th 
November, 2018is likely to infringe on the Fundamental Human Right of the 1 st 
Applicant and should be perpetually prevented 
III. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that noneof the Respondents or any of 
their agencies should disallow or hinder any academic activities (especially Tutorials) 
being anchored by the 1st Applicant  
IV. And for such other Orders and Declarations this court shall deem fit on the circumstance of 
this case. 
On 28th of November, 2019 the date fixed for hearing, D.R Sarumi , lead counsel for applicants 
seek to adopt the applicants‟ brief but an objection was raised by the respondent on the ground 

6 | P a g e  
 
that paragraph 3, 11 and 12 of the affidavit deposed to by Okpara Lawrence is grossly 
incompetent and urged the court hold so. The  claimants‟ counsel distilled a sole issue for 
determination as follow; 
Whether the inclusion of extraneous material particularly legal argument and conclusion render 
an affidavit incompetent 
On the issue the respondents argued that the inclusion of extran eous material particularly legal 
argument and conclusion while drafting an affidavit renders it incompetent. They refer the court 
to paragraph 3, 11 and 12 of the applicant‟s affidavit deposed to by Okpara Lawrence and 
section 115(2) of Evidence Act, 2011.  They argued further that any paragraph that offends the 
provision of section 115(2) of the evidence Act should be struck out and discountenance with in 
its entirety as having no evidential value. They rely on the case of AKINBAYO V. 
OLOWOLAYEMO AND ORS 2016 LPELR 41946 C.A  
The applicants‟ counsel argued that the paragraphs referred to do not offend the provision of 
section 115 of Evidence Act but rather, in the opinion of the deponent, a fact with his knowledge. 
He submitted that affidavits are meant for fact within the opinion of the deponent. 
The court in their ruling held that “ an affidavit is a statement of fact which the maker or 
deponent swear to be true to the best of his knowledge, information and belief. It is based on 
fact which the deponent has personal knowledge of based on information which he believes to 
be true. Such affidavit must not include legal argument, conclusion or other extraneous 
matters, any paragraph of an affidavit that offend any of this provision may be struck out by 
the court but if it is not struck out then the court should not attach any weigh to it. I relied on 
the case of EMMANUEL NJOEMANA V. BARRISTER FRANK ONYEBUCHI UGBOMA 
&BANOR (2014) AELR 3203 C.A suit no. CA/OW/323/2010 
On an examination by the court, the court finds paragraph 3 of affidavit deposed to by 
OKWARA LAWRENCE to be legal argument where he states that “that by virtue of section 5 
of the law students’ society constitution, I am a member of the law students’ society” and that 
paragraph 11 and 12 are facts whic h in the opinion of the deponent are true. Therefore 
paragraph 3 is hereby struck out for offending section 115(2) 
Applicants „counsel adopted the applicants‟ brief and urged the court hold so. The applicants 
distilled two issues for determination as follows; 

7 | P a g e  
 
Whether or not the fundamental Human Right of expression, freedom of thought and freedom of 
association of the 1st Applicant and its members are to be infringed upon 
Whether or not the resolution to restrict the facilitation of tutorials to law st udents‟ society 
Academic committee goes against the spirit of the law students‟ society constitution 2018 as 
amended 
On issue one, they submitted that the fundamental Human Right of expression, freedom of 
thought and freedom of association of the 1st Applicant and its members are to be infringed upon. 
They further stratified the issue into four standpoints via 
That an application for breach of Fundamental Human Rights can be brought to the court even 
where the breach is only likely to occur and not yet occurred 
That the applicant and its members‟ freedom of expression is about to be breached 
That the applicant and its members‟ freedom of thought is about to be breached 
That the applicant and its members‟ freedom of association is about to be breached 
On the first standpoint they submitted that the applicants can apply to the court for a likely 
breach of any of its‟ fundamental rights even when the breach has not yet occurred. They relied 
on section 46(1) of the constitution of Federal Republic of Nigeria,Orde r 2 Rule 1 of the 
Fundamental Right (Enforcement Procedures) Rules 2019 and the case of CHIJUKA V. 
MADUEWESI (2011) ALL FWLR (PT. 586) 517 
On the second standpoint they submitted that the applicant and its members‟ freedom of 
expression is about to be brea ched, they relied on section 39 of constitution of Federal Republic 
of Nigeria and paragraph 8(b) of the 1st deponent‟ affidavit 
On the third standpoint they submitted that the applicant and its members‟ freedom of thought is 
about to be breached, they relied on section 38 of constitution of Federal Republic of Nigeria and 
paragraph 8(b) of the 1st deponent‟ affidavit 
On the fourth standpoint they submitted that the applicant and its members‟ freedom of 
association is about to be breached, they relied on se ction 40 of constitution of Federal Republic 
of Nigeria and the case of INEC V MUSA (2003) 3 NWLR (PT. 806) 72 
They further argued on the issue that organization of tutorial by the applicant is within the aims 
and objectives of the establishment of the fir st applicant and they relied on section 3(3) and 
section 3(5) of the Liberty Chambers constitution as amended 2018 and the policy which is to be 

8 | P a g e  
 
initiated will interfere with the aims and objectives of the 1 st applicant and the interest of its 
members and later suffice a barricade between the 1 st applicant and its members. They urge the 
court to frown at such situation relying on the case of A.G FEDERATION V. ABUBAKAR 
(2007) 10 NWLR (PT. 1041) 1. 
On issue two, they submitted that the resolution to restrict the facilitation of tutorials to law 
students‟ society Academic committee goes against the spirit of the law students‟ society 
constitution 2018 as amended. The argued on the issue was stratified into two via 
That the law students‟ Society Constitution 2018 as amended provides as one of its aims and 
objectives, the facilitation of social interests in so far as it concerns intellectualism 
That the LSS constitution guarantees all its members, the en titlement to enjoy all right(s) which are 
envisaged under our constitution 
On the first standpoint, they submitted that Law students‟ Society Constitution 2018 as amended 
provides as one of its aims and objectives, the facilitation of social interests in s o far as it 
concerns intellectualism. They relied on section 4(3) and 4(4) of LSS constitution . They argued 
further that 1 st applicant qualifies as society within Nigeria as envisaged by section 4(3)of the 
LSS constitution to help the society in achieving his constitutional aims and objectives and that 
the use of the word “promote” as used in section 4(4) of LSS constitution means that the Law 
Student Society will not interfere, take over or commandeer these activities but rather provide 
aids to see to thei r success. They argued further that section 7(4) of the LSS constitution  has 
confer on every member of the society, the locus standi to approach the court for compelling any 
member or officer or organ to conform with the aims and objective as set out in Chapter 2 
On the second standpoint, they submitted that LSS constitution guarantees all its members, the 
entitlement to enjoy all right(s) which are envisaged under constitution of Federal Republic of 
Nigeria. They relied on section 7(5) of LSS Constitution  and further argued that the guaranteed 
rights are the Fundamental  Human Right which include, inter alia, freedom of expression, 
thought and association. They relied on section 39(1), 38(1) and 39 of CFRN. They referred the 
court to the case of SALIHU V. S ULEIMAN & ORS (2014) AELR 4071 CA  as to the 
sacrosanct nature of Fundamental Rights and submitted that the purported act of the respondents 
will interfere with the enjoyment of the applicants rights. 

9 | P a g e  
 
They further submitted that the respondents are incapabl e and incompetent in facilitating the 
objectives inferred from section 4(3) and 4(4)of LSS Constitution . They referred the court to 
paragraph 8 and 10 of the 2 nd and 3 rddeponent respectively and that the applicants are ready to 
promote such aims by paragraph 9 and 11 of the 2nd and 3rd deponent respectively 
A preliminary objection brought pursuant to order 3 rule 2 of LSS Court rules (as amended) 2019  
which was dated 28th of November, 2019 was adopted by counsel for 1 st and 3rd defendants on 28 th 
of November, 2019, where the defendants‟ counsel distilled sole issue for determination as follow; 
Whether or not a written statement/deposition on oath must be signed in the presence of the 
person authorized to administer the oath. 
The issue was further stratified into two standpoints via 
That the suit in question is grossly incompetent having not fulfilled the requirements of the law 
That this honourable court does not have requisite jurisdiction to entertain the suit brought by the 
claimant. 
On the first standpoint, they submit that the suit is grossly incompetent having not fulfilled the 
requirement of the law that an affidavit must not only be sworn before a person duly authorized to 
take oaths but must be also be signed in the presence of s uch officer. They refer the court to section 
112 and 117(4) of Evidence Act and they relied on the case of MUHAMMEDU BUHARI V. INEC 
(2008) 1SCNJ @ 91 and ALIYU V. BULAKI (2019) LPELR -46513(CA). They referred the court 
to paragraph 7 and 8 of the affidavit in support of the preliminary objection where it was stated that 
the three affidavits in support of the claimant‟s application has already been signed before it was 
brought before the commissioner of oath. 
On the second standpoint, they submitted that the court lacks jurisdiction to entertain the suit 
because it was not instituted by due process of the law and same rob it court of its jurisdiction. They 
relied on the case of MADUKOLU V. NKEMDILIM 
The claimants in their rely to the preliminary objection a sole issue via; 
Whether or not the provision of section 112 of Evidence Act has been duly satisfied by the 
applicant? 
On the issue, the claimants submitted that the provision of section 112 of the Evidence Act has been 
duly complied with. They argued further  that there is no law in our jurisdiction that makes the 
registrar as a commissioner of oath but the second schedule to the oath act provided that the registrar 

10 | P a g e  
 
can have the processes signed before him or her. They referred the court to the paragraph 5, 6,  7 and 
9 of the affidavit in support of the reply to the preliminary objection of the defendants which stated 
that the three affidavits were signed before AdeshinaRahmat who happens to be a registrar.  
The court was of the opinion that there are conflictin g averments in the affidavit to the preliminary 
objection and affidavit in support of the reply to the preliminary objection particularly paragraph 7 
and 8 of the affidavit in support of the preliminary objection which states that the three affidavits in 
support of the originating summons were signed before they were brought before the commissioner 
of oath and paragraph 5, 6 and 7 of the reply to the preliminary objection which states that the three 
affidavits in support of the originating summons were sign ed before the registrar who qualified by 
law to be a commissioner of oath. The court by provision of section 116 of the Evidence Act 
subpoenaed the chief registrar in person of Yusuf Salem, who signed the process as the 
commissioner of oath and source thro ugh which the information in affidavit in support of the 
preliminary objection was deposed to and also the registrar in person of Adeshina Ramat, source 
through which the information in affidavit in support of the reply to the preliminary objection was 
deposed to, in other to resolve the irreconcilable conflict in the two affidavits. 
On 3rd of November, 2019, the two witnesses were examined by the parties 
In the claimants‟ counsel‟s address, they argued that there is contradiction in defendants‟ affidavit i n 
support of the preliminary objection and statement of the defendant‟s witness during examination on 
the ground that paragraph 10 of defendants‟ affidavit in support of the preliminary objection stated 
that the information was given to the deponent of the  defendants‟ affidavit in support of the 
preliminary objection on 21st of November and the witness stated that the information was not given 
on 21st of November but he couldn‟t recollect the date. They further argued that such contradiction 
has whittled down the evidential weight to be attached to the defendants‟ affidavit in support of the 
preliminary objection. They relied on the case of DIBBIE & ORS V. THE STATE (2007) 3SC pt 
1 p. 176  
The Defendants‟ counsel in their address argued that there is contradiction in the claimants‟ affidavit 
in support of the reply to the preliminary objection and the statement of claimants‟ witness during 
examination on the ground that paragraph 8 deposed to the fact that she received a call from a friend 
requiring her immediate present after the processes has been signed before her and could not wait to 
sign as the commissioner of oath but during examination she claimed to received the call from her 

11 | P a g e  
 
brother. They submitted that all her testimony should be jettisoned relying on the case of ADOBA V. 
STATE (2018) LPELR 44065 SC  
They argued further that the claimant‟s witness is not a credible witness having failed the veracity, 
credibility and accuracy test as contained in section 223 of Evidence Act on the ground that she, as 
the commissioner of oath, asserted that she did not know a portion designated for the signature of the 
commissioner of oath and that she admitted that she could take her time for the three deponents to 
append their signature but couldn‟t spend a few second s for her to fulfilled the duty imposed on her 
as the commissioner of oath to sign the processes signed before her. They argued further that the 
court should not only be wary but also be careful of the probative value attached to it. They replied 
on the cases of JOHNBULL ARHABONE V. STATE CA/B/288C/2018 and the case of AGBO 
V. STATE (2006) NSQLR 25 @ 136 SC 
In the court ruling, the court states; 
From the foregoing submissions of both counsels, it is clear that what is in issue  
Whether the witnesses are credible witness? 
Whether affidavits can be sign before one commissioner of oath and same affidavits are signed by 
another commissioner of oath who the affidavits were not signed before? 
ON ISSUE ONE: It is the stance of this court that there was no contra diction in the evidence of 
the two witnesses and that even if there were, such contradictions were not material to derogate 
from the proof of the affidavit. It should be stressed at this point that contradiction in the evidence 
of witness that will be fata l must be substantial. Minor contradiction which did not affect the 
credibility of witnesses may not be fatal. Contradiction must relate to the substance. This view is 
amply predicated upon the trite and well settled principle, to the effect that material contradictions 
can only exist where a piece of evidence is totally at variance with the evidence especially pleaded 
on facts. Thus, minor discrepancies often exist in testimonies of witnesses who are ready and 
committed to tell the truth. Indeed, it's natu rally human to sometimes err. See NWANKWO VS. 
OFOMATA (2009) 11 NWLR (Pt. 1153) 496 @ 515 paragraphs A -D." Per SAULAWA, J.C.A. 
(Pp.40-41, paras. G-D) - MR. HENRY OGBOMO v. MR. TOSAYE OGBOMO & ANOR 2014 Suit 
No: CA/B/128/201. if every contradiction no matt er how trivial to the overwhelming evidence 
before the court will vitiate a trial, then nearly all cases would fail. The defendants’ counsel 
argued strenuously that claimant’s witness is not a credible witness on the ground that she 

12 | P a g e  
 
admitted that she could  take her time for the three deponents to append their signature but 
couldn’t spend a few seconds for her to fulfill the duty imposed on her as the commissioner of 
oath to sign the processes signed before her. Court considered that submission of defendants ’ 
counsel to be totally misguided. It gave its reasons that it is possible for one to have time to begin a 
process and urgent issue may arise that one will not be able to finish it. Also there is nowhere in 
the record of the court where it was stated that the witness claimed not to know where to sign but 
instead she claimed not to know that she must be the one to sign. 
The court from the examination deduced that the processes were signed before Registrar 
Adeshina Ramat who acted in capacity of commissioner of oath but couldn’t sign as a 
commissioner of oath because of her busy schedule and the processes were taken before the Chief 
Registrar in person of Yusuf Salem who signed as the commissioner of oath but the processes 
were not signed in his presence. 
 ON ISSUE TWO: Affidavit is simply a declaration on oath, a formal sworn statement of facts 
signed by the deponent and witnessed as to the veracity of the deposition's signature by the taker 
of the oath such as the commissioner for oaths, notary public or even  a magistrate. Thus, 
Affidavit evidence is a statement of fact which the deponent swears to be true to the best of his 
knowledge, information or belief. See CHIEF CHUKWUMEKA ODUMEGU OJUKWU VS MISS 
STELLA ONYEADOR (1991) 7 NWLR (pt 203) 286 at 317. A depone nt is a person who swears to 
a written statement or one who swears to an affidavit under the Evidence Act. In BUHARI V 
INEC (supra) TOBI JSC stated thus: "...a person who swears to a written statement under 
Paragraph 1(1)(b) of the Practice Directions or one who swears to an affidavit under the Evidence 
Act is known as a deponent; a person who testifies by deposition." 
The requirement to authenticate an affidavit sworn before a person duly authorized to take oaths 
is provided in Section 117 (4) as follows; "An Affidavit when sworn shall be signed by the 
deponent or if he cannot write or is blind, marked by him personally with his mark in the presence 
of the person before whom it is taken." 
For an affidavit to be admitted in evidence or allowed to be used as evidence, it must not only be 
sworn before a person so authorized to administer the oath such as the commissioner for oaths or 
a Notary Public, it must also be signed in the presence of such an officer. Additionally oath taking 

13 | P a g e  
 
goes beyond mere signing of the contents of the document before the person authorized to 
administer the oath. The concept of oath taking involves: 
The Deponent making a statement in writing, 
The document is taken to a commissioner for oath or a person duly authorized to take the oaths, 
The Commissioner for oath requires the deponent to swear on a holy book particular to the 
deponent's faith or a mere declaration for a deponent, whose faith forbids him to swear, 
The commissioner for oath then makes the deponent to verify what has been stated, 
He deponent afterwards signs in the presence of the Commissioner for oath who witnesses that 
the affidavit was sworn to in his presence. 
It is after this has taken place, that the commissioner for Oaths verifies the contents and then 
confirms that same was signed in his presence by endorsing his own signature to that effect. This 
explains the phrase "Before Me" usually signed by the Commissioner for oaths. Therefore for 
any such deposition to be competent for use, it must be duly signed and sworn be fore the 
appropriate officer in accordance with the Evidence Act and the Oaths Act. It is the due swearing 
that gives life to the declaration on oath. Without the due swearing of the deposition in the 
presence of and by the proper officer authorized to tak e the oath, the statement on oath is a mere 
piece of paper and not a deposition or affidavit. See UDUSEGBE V SPDC (NIG) LTD (2008) 9 
NWLR (Pt. 1093) 593, MARAYA PLASTICS LTD V INLAND BANK NIG. PLC (2002) 7 NWLR 
(Pt. 765) 109. The conditions necessary to ma ke an affidavit competent were stated in the case of 
DR MUHAMMAD IBRAHIM ONUJABE & ORS V FATIMA IDRIS (2011) LPELR - 4059 (CA) 
as follows: "The Oaths act is a general statute that deals with oaths. The provision under 
Evidence Act on affidavit places a con dition precedent which ought to be fulfilled to render the 
affidavit competent. That is why a defect as regards the swearing on oath is not a mere 
irregularity as to form but defect as to substance." 
Importantly, section 109 of Evidence Act provided that for an affidavit sworn in Nigeria to be 
admissible, it must be sworn before a judge or officer (which in our case is the registrar of the 
LSS court) or other person duly authorized to take affidavit. A lthough the court may permit an 
affidavit to be used notwithstanding the fact that it is defective in form according to the Act 
however before the court could do so, it must be satisfied that the affidavit has been sworn before 
a person authorized. See Sec tion 113 of Evidence Act. To ascertain a person authorized, the 

14 | P a g e  
 
affidavit must bear the seal or signature of the person who administer the oath (judge, magistrate, 
officer or other person authorized) and the authority of such person to administer oaths. Se e 
Section 111 of Evidence Act. 
It is evident before the court that the three affidavits in support of the originating summons does 
not bear the seal or signature of the person who administered the oath and the person whose 
signature appeared on the process  does not administer the oath. This does not meet the 
requirement of Evidence and Oath Act. Thus, the three affidavits in support of the originating 
summons are intrinsically inadmissible. 
The court could have by section 114 of the Evidence Act ordered the  re-swearing of the affidavits 
but same was not prayed for, the end result, sadly, is that the claimant has to swallow the bitter 
pill, for this Court is bound to answer prayer sought for. Prayers must be specifically made, where 
therefore, a court grants a party a relief which it did not seek, it has made an order on an issue 
not raised by the parties. The resultant effect of that order is that it will be declared a nullity, 
having been made without jurisdiction. This court is not a Father Christmas that d ishes out 
relieves when same was not asked for, even though, we are not in Christmas session. I relied on 
AIRTEL NETWORKS LIMITED V. MRS PATRICIA BOSEDE GEORGE & ORS (2014) SUIT 
NO; CA/L/572/2010. 
This honourable court hereby finds the preliminary objectio n of the defendants to be 
meritorious and holds that the defect in affidavits in support of the originating summons is not 
a mere irregularity as to form but defect as to substanceAs a result, the suit is a poison for this 
court and the court will not eat it. The Preliminary Objection is hereby upheld and the suit is 
struck out for want of jurisdiction.” 
On 9thof December, 2019, the action was re-filed and adopted by D.R Sarumi 
A preliminary objection brought pursuant to order 3 rule 2 of LSS Court rules (a s amended) 2019 
which was dated 12 th of December, 2019 was sought to be adopted and the applicants raised 
objection to the adoption on the ground that the preliminary objection is supported with affidavit 
which delves into the substance of the case. A sole issue was couched via: 
Whether or not a preliminary objection can delve into the substance of the case 
Argument of applicants‟ counsel on the issue was further stratify into two standpoints 

15 | P a g e  
 
That to determine cause of action, recourse should only be made t o the claimant‟s affidavit or 
statement of claim as the case may be 
That considering paragraph 9 of the affidavit attached to the preliminary objection, the applicant 
have delve into substance of the matter 
On the first standpoint, they submitted that reas onable cause of action can only be traced to 
statement of claim or averment in affidavit in support of originating summon or motion. They 
relied on the case of BARBUS & CO NIG LTD V. OKOFOR UDEJI (2018) LPELR 
44501SC. they further argued that using affidavit to liquidate the already solidify cause of action 
is an abuse of due process 
On the second standpoint, they argued that the affidavit attached to the preliminary objection, has 
delve into substance of the matter. They relied on the case of ZENITH BANK PLC & ORS V. 
OLIMPEX 2018 LPELR 45573 CA . They refer the court to paragraph 9 of the affidavit in 
support of the preliminary objection which denied expressly paragraph 8 of affidavit in support 
of the originating process 
The respondent in the reply to the objection stated couched a sole issue 
Whether or not an affidavit can be attached to the preliminary objection in a suit? 
On the issue, they submitted that affidavit can be attached to the preliminary objective. They 
argued that although some preliminary objection can be based on law which will not require 
affidavit evidence however some are based on fact and will require aff idavit evidence for 
instance where the preliminary objection is based on the fact that the suit is statute barred, it will 
required affidavit evidence stating when the time began to run. They relied on AGF V. ANPP 
(2003) 8 NWLR PT 851 PG 182  and submitted that the affidavit in support of the preliminary 
objection, which was born out to clarify whether a suit has a reasonable cause of action, is 
required to denied applicant‟s affidavit deposed to by Mustapha Habeeb particularly paragraph 8 
which is to the effect that a resolution has been made.  
The court in its ruling couched two issues via; 
Whether or not a preliminary objection can be supported by an affidavit? 
Whether or not a preliminary which delves into the substance is competent? 
On issue one, Prelimi nary objection is an objection which is mostly raised to challenge the 
jurisdiction of the court to entertain the suit or appeal or to challenge the competence of the 

16 | P a g e  
 
suit itself and where the determination of the preliminary objection determines the suit  or  
appeal completely,  then  the  business  of  the  Court  is  over  and  there  is  no  necessity  to  
proceed  to  determine  the  suit  or appeal  on  the  merit.  See  ALLANAH  Vs.  KPOLOKWU  
(2016)  LPELR-40724  (SC)  pg.  10-11,  paras.  D  -  A 
Preliminary objection though usually bothers on questions of law, thus do not require 
affidavit. However where there's necessity for any fact to be proved for a preliminary objection 
to be duly sustained, then affidavit ought to be filed. This position was given judicial 
attestation in the case of CONTRACT RESOURCE NIGERIA LTD. & ANOR. V. UNITED 
BANK FOR AFRICA PLC (2011) LPELR -SC.292/2003 where the Supreme Court held that 
"Preliminary objections are usually on Law consequently no affidavit is necessary, but  where 
the need to produce or rely on facts becomes necessary an affidavit ought to be filed." PER 
RHODES-VIVOUR, J.S.C (P. 10, Paras. F -G) - Premised on the above therefore, it is the 
holding of this court that preliminary objection can be supported with an affidavit where their 
is necessity for proof of a particular fact. 
On issue two, preliminary objection is to challenge the competence of the Court to hear and 
determine the suit and not to challenge or determine issue(s).ZENITH BANK & ANOR v. 
OLIMPEX (NIG) LTD (2018) LPELR -45573(CA) ASIKPO & ANOR vs. GEORGE & ANOR 
(2012) LPELR-9330 (CA) pg.13-14, 
Affidavit in support of respondent brief of arguments denied paragraph of the originating 
process. This on its own qualifies as counter affidavit OGEDENGBE SURA JUDEEN OLA v. 
UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN & ORS (2014) AELR 3678 (CA) This is touching on the 
substantive suit, and the argument is best reserved for the substantive suit. The affidavit is 
hereby struck out for delving into substantive suit 
The preliminary objection was adopted by counsel for respondent on 12 th of December, 2019, where 
the respondents‟ counsel distilled sole issue for determination as follow; 
Whether or not this honourable court has jurisdiction to entertain the case of the claimants 
The issue was further stratified into three standpoints via 
That the application employed upon which the claimants were brought to court is not 
in conformity with the law students‟ society court rules 2019. That is, being the only 
court Rules that regulate proceedings within the Law Students Court 

17 | P a g e  
 
That the application of the claimants which contains the affidavits of the claimants 
does not disclose a reasonable cause of action 
That as such, the case of the claimants is outside the jurisdictional competence of this 
honourable court 
On the first standpoint, they submitted that the mode which the applicant commenced the action is 
alien to LSS Court Rules 2019. They argued further that the mode employed does not have basis 
under Order 2 of this court which is on form and mod e of commencement of an action and thereby 
resulting to breach of sacred Rules of this court. Relying on USMAN V. TAMADENA & CO. 
LTD (2015) LPELR – 40376 CA, JWAN V. ECOBANK & ANOR (2018) LPELR – 45631and 
AGIP NIG LTD V. AGIP PETROLI INTERNATIONAL & ORS (2 010) 5 NWLR (PT 1187) 
348, They submitted that rules of court must be obeyed by litigant and are binding on all parties 
before the court.  
On the second standpoint, they submitted that the application does not disclose a reasonable cause of 
action. Relying  on the cases of EGBE V. ADEFARASIN (1987) 1 NWLR (PT 47)1 @ 20; 
DIAMOND PETROLEUM INT LTD V.GOVERNOR OF CBN (2015) 14 NWLR (PT.1479) 
CA. they argued further that the paragraph of affidavit in support of the claimant‟s application which 
seems to disclose c ause of action is based on mere information of an action which was not 
eventually carried out and same amount to hearsay evidence.  
On the third standpoint, they submitted that the court lacks jurisdiction to entertain the suit for non - 
conformity with the rules of the court (LSS Court) and lack of reasonable cause of action which are 
major ingredient in determining jurisdiction of competent court. They relied on madukolu v. 
Nkemdilim (1962) NSSC Volume 2, 374 @ 379 -380, SHAMANG V. SHAMANG (2018) 
LPELR-44365 
The applicant in their reply to the preliminary objection couched there issues via:  
Whether or not the procedure of Fundamental Rights Enforcement Procedure Rules adopted by the 
Applicants is recognizable in our jurisdiction 
Whether or not the Applicants have cause of action 
Whether or not this court hereby possess requisite jurisdiction to entertain our application 
On the first issue, they argued that the procedure of Fundamental Rights Enforcement Procedure 
Rule adopted is recognized in our jurisdictio n. They further argued that section 7(5) of the LSS 

18 | P a g e  
 
constitution guaranteed fundamental rights provided under constitution of Federal Republic of 
Nigeria and section 46 of constitution of Federal Republic of Nigeria empowered the chief judge to 
make rules in respect to practice and procedure in High Court which was activated by making 
provision for Fundamental Rights Enforcement Procedure Rule. They relied on the case of Enukeme 
v. Mazi (2015) 17 NWLR. They submitted that although the LSS court does not pro vide for such 
originating process he must however recognized it because it is not a slave to its own rule 
On the second issue, they submitted that the applicant has a reasonable cause of action and that 
whenever the court is to determine cause of action, it is the statement of claim or averments in 
affidavits in support of originating summons or motion that must be considered. So long as they 
discloses cause of action or raises some questions which can be decided by a judge, there is a 
reasonable cause of action. They further argued that cause of action in enforcement of right being a 
sui generis does not only arises when the right has been breached but also when the right is likely to 
be breached. They relied on section 46(1) of Constitution of Federal Rep ublic of Nigeria. They 
content further that the LSS Court is equivalent to State High court on the ground that section 7(5) of 
LSS Constitution guaranteed rights enshrined in chapter 4 of the constitution which are to be 
enforced by the High Court. They th erefore submitted that there right needs not be infringed upon 
but since there is likelihood of same to be infringed upon, they have reasonable cause of action to 
institute the suit. 
On the third issue, they submitted that the court has jurisdiction to entertain the suit 
On the first standpoint, they submit that the suit is grossly incompetent having not fulfilled the 
require 
The court ruled that: 
“In my consideration of this preliminary objection, I will formulate there issues as they are 
satisfactory enough to dispose of the contention of parties 
Whether this suit has been commenced by proper originating process? 
Whether there is reasonable cause of action? 
Whether the court has requisite jurisdiction to entertain this suit? 
ISSUE ONE: the validity of the originating process in a proceeding before a Court is 
fundamental, as the competence of the proceeding is sine quo non to the legitimacy of any 
mode adopted to initiate the suit. Failure to commence an action without a valid originating 

19 | P a g e  
 
process goes to the root of the case and same makes the case incompetent and a nullity, Kida V. 
Ogunmola (2006) 13 NWLR (Pt. 997) @ 384 PER Abdulquadir C.J.L.S.S (P.9) SALAM 
ABDULSALAM v. ADEDIMEJI QAYYIM ABDUL -HAFEEZ & ANOR CITATION: (2019) 
LCELR 1819 – 008  
The Fundamental Rights (Enforcement Procedure Rules) 2009 are specifically restricted only 
to actions on contravention of the provisions of Chapter IV of the Constitution. It is only 
actions founded on a breach of fundamental rights guaranteed in the Constitution of the 
Federal Republic of Nigeria can be enforced under the Fundamental Rights (Enforcement 
Procedure Rules) 2009. I relied on THE SURVEYOR GENERAL OF CROSS RIVER STATE 
&ORS v. MR. OPUTE JONATHAN &ORS(2014) AELR 4531 (CA), FEDERAL REPUBLIC 
OF NIGERIA & ORS v . ALHAJIMOHAMMED SANI ABACHA & ORS(2014) AELR 3070 
(CA) 
The suit which was originated from 7(5) of the LSS constitution was began by Enforcement 
(Procedure)Rule which was ordinarily meant for enforcement of fundamental human right. I 
must state that 7(5) o n its own is not fundamental human right but instead a right to 
fundamental human right. If it's to be treated as fundamental right, by so doing that confer 
jurisdiction on this court to try cases on fundamental human right. It must be borne in mind 
that fundamental human right are sui generis action which guaranteed every person, member 
or non member, who alleges that any of the Fundamental Rights provided for in the 
Constitution Is or likely to be infringed upon, the right to approach the court. The resul tant 
effect is that non member of the society can approach the court for enforcement of his 
fundamental rights as against the spirit of LSS constitution creating the court and the rules of 
the court 
Therefore, an action for breach of right to fundamental r ight should be commenced the same 
way breach of other rights in section 7 of LSS Constitution can be commenced. If Rules of 
court provide for a particular format for the commencement of action or taking out of any 
processes such as Brief of Argument, a party is bound to comply with the format, where it falls 
to do so, a court of law is entitled to hold that action or that process is incompetent VINCENT 
AHMAD OCHEGBUDU V. BONIFACE AGBALA (2014) AELR 3465(CA) however where 
the mode of commencing such an actio n is not provided for in the court rules, the court has 

20 | P a g e  
 
the inherent power to entertain an action commenced. A careful perusal of Law Students' 
Society court rules 2019 reveals that the court rules is yet to provide for modes to commence 
action for breach of rights. 
The court is not a robot who refrains doing justice because there is no provision in the rules 
for the application before him or who rigidly follows arid legalism or technicalities to such a 
point that justice is not done to the parties. He is t o do substantial justice between the parties 
and in doing so rules of court must always be interpreted in such a way as to avoid 
unnecessary adherence to technicalities. When rules of court are silent, a judge is not expected 
to say to himself, this cannot  be done, since the Rules of Court do not provide for it. If that 
were the case, we will not get anywhere and that will be bad and unfortunate for Rule of Law 
see DICK V. OUR AND OIL COMPANY (2018) LPELR -44354(SC). The first issue is hereby 
resolve in favour of the applicant 
ISSUE TWO: It has been stated that a cause of action is made up of the factual situation 
which gives the right to judicial relief. In simple terms, the cause of action arises the moment 
a wrong is done to the plaintiff by the defendant.  I rely on the cases of ONIKEKE MUSA & 
ORS V. LIBERTY CHAMBERS LSSJ/009/2019 AND RINCO CONSTRUCTION COMPANY 
LTD V VEEPEE INDUSTRY LTD AND ANOR 2015 LPELR 2949 SC. PER MUHAMMED 
J.L.S.S (P. 24) AJEWOLE OLAMIDE SAMUEL  V. THE SPEAKER, HOUSE OF 
REPRESENTATIVE LAW STUDENTS’ SOCIETY & Anor CITATION: (2019) LCELR 1819 
– 007, DASUKI AHMAD OLUWANISHOLA & ANOR V. HUMAN RIGHTS CHAMBERS & 
ORS CITATION: (2019) LCELR 1819 – 009, SALAM ABDULSALAM v. ADEDIMEJI 
QAYYIM ABDUL-HAFEEZ & ANOR CITATION: (2019) LCELR 1819 – 008 
Paragraph 8 of the applicants' affidavit deposed to by Mustapha Olanrewaju Habeeb disclose 
a reasonable cause of action. The issue is hereby resolved in favour of the applicant  
ISSUE THREE: It is now settled principle of law that, a court is only competent t o adjudicate 
over a matter, when all the conditions precedent of its jurisdiction have been satisfied. Sequel 
so the ruling on issue one and the, the court cannot be denied or rob off of his jurisdictions 
when it has same for the court must protect his jur isdiction jealously. I relied on ONI v. 
CADBURY NIGERIA PLC(2016) AELR 10548 (SC). The third issue is also resolved in favour 
of the applicants 

21 | P a g e  
 
On the whole, the preliminary objection is hereby struck out for want of merit. 
I shall dwell on the defence forthwith, the defendant distilled two issues for their defence, via; 
Whether or not resolution has been reached as regards harmonization of the faculty’s tutorials? 
Whether or not Executive council has the constitutional requisite power to give directives to  the 
chambers established in the law student society? 
On issue one; they submitted that resolution has been reached as regards harmonization of the 
faculty‟s tutorials. They refer the court to paragraph 10 -13 of the affidavit in support of the 
defence. They argued further that the meeting was merely to call for opinion towards possible 
harmonization of the faculty‟s tutorials which was fruitless at the end of the meeting and that 
after the meeting, chambers have been conducting their activities, tutorial in clusive without any 
interference, they refer the court to paragraph 4, 11 and 12 of the affidavit in support. Relying on 
the case of PLATEAU STATE OF NIGERIA V. ATTORNEY GENERAL OF THE 
FEDERATION (2006) AFWLR PT. 305 AT PG. 590 , they submitted that the sui t is 
speculative 
On issue two, they submitted that Executive council has the constitutional requisite power to 
give directives to the chambers established in the law student society. They relied on section 
40(2) of LSS. They implore the court to employ lit eral rule in interpreting the section relying on 
the case of THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA V. YAU MUHAMMED (2014) 
AELR 3169 SC 
In my consideration of this case, I will adopt the following issue formulated as they are 
satisfactory enough to dispose of the contention by the parties. 
Whether the right of the applicants and its member to right guaranteed under the constitution of 
Federal Republic of Nigeria has been or likely to be infringed upon? 
On the issue, I must reinstate that the right provided under s ection 7(5) of the Law Students‟ 
Society constitution is not available as a fundamental right but as right to fundamental right 
based on the principle that fundamental right are available to member and non member of the 
society for being human but our cour t is only saddled with enforcement of right of members of 
the society and its power does not extend to enforcement of right of non member of the society. I 
rely on the case of SALIHU V. SULEIMAN & ORS (2014) AELR 4071 (CA), VINCENT 

22 | P a g e  
 
AHMAD OCHEGBUDU V. BONIFACE AGBALA (2014) AELR 3465(CA) and section 37 
of LSS CONSTITUTION. 
On the question whether the right to right of fundament human right of the applicants or its 
member has been infringed upon, it is beyond argument being a statutory body established by 
section 40 of LSS Constitution that the 1 st applicants and its member including the 2 nd applicant 
have right to freedom of expression, thought and association has claimed by the applicants and of 
course when you have a right, you must of way of necessity has a means to vindicate it, of what 
important is a right without a means of vindicating it. The first applicant‟s rights extend to 
section 40(2) of the LSS Constitution to conduct their own affairs although subject to provision 
of LSS Constitution and overriding policies of the society 
The acclaimed right of the applicants which source from section 38, 39 and 40 of Constitution of 
Federal Republic of Nigeria as relate to this case is not without its limitation at the face of 
interest of defence, public safety,  public order, public morality, public health or for the purpose 
of protecting the rights and freedom of other person as stated in section 45 of CFRN. 
From the fact of the case and the evidence before the court, the acclaimed infringement of these 
rights r est on the meeting summon by the executive president and other members of the 
executive which came up on 4 th of November, 2019 with the agenda to gather opinion on the 
possible harmonization of various tutorial. A reasonable question to ask is whether gath ering 
opinion on harmonization of the tutorials sends a signal of likelihood of infringement of right. To 
allow every likelihood of infringement of right to be challengeable will open floodgate for 
litigation therefore the likelihood of such infringement m ust be reasonable. What I would 
consider reasonable likelihood in this case is if there has been a resolution to harmonize the 
tutorial. Then, the court will be able to ascertain whether such harmonization is legal or not. It 
behoves the court to only addr ess fact in issues and not anticipatory issue, the court are neither 
soothsayers nor a prophet. The issue is hereby resolve in favour of the respondent. 
Your lordships, permit me to give opinion for purpose of education on issue, which revolve 
solely on th e respondent brief which is sort of fact attached, on whether the executive have the 
power to give directives to chamber. The power of the executive to give directives or make 
government policy cannot be jettisoned for quick development of the law however such 
directives or policy cannot supersede the law, for the court cannot and must not willy nilly  

23 | P a g e  
 
uphold government policy or directives without reference to the law and statute where such 
policy is carried out inequitably or where its decision travests eq uity. The court will upset same. 
See OKUSAMI V. A.G LAGOS STATE (2015) 4 NWLR (PT. 1449) 220 C.A    
Now I shall grant my prayer 
Prayer 1, 3 & 5 of the respondent attached to the respondent defence is hereby granted. All other 
orders and reliefs sought in this suit are hereby refused 
 
OPINION OF HON. OLATOYINBO MUHAMMED JLSS 
The case was set in motion pursuant to order 2 rule 1 of the Fundamental Rights‟ Enforcement 
Procedure Rules 2019. It is dated .The applicants raised two issues for determination before this 
court: 
Whether or not the fundamental human right of expression, freedom of thought and freedom 
of association of the 1st Applicant and its members are to be infringed upon? 
Whether or not the resolution to restrict the facilitation of tutorials to th e law students’ society 
Academic Committee goes against the spirit of the Law Students’ Society Constitution 2018 as 
amended? 
In support of the originating process are three affidavits. The 1st deposed to by one Mustapha 
Olanrewaju Habeeb contained 9 parag raphs while the 2 nd deposed to by one Dauda Ridwan 
Sarumi has 13 paragraphs and the last containing 14 paragraphs was deposed to by one Okwara 
Lawrence Ogechukwu. The applicants pray the court for the following orders. 
An order of this honorable court that  the restriction of tutorials in the faculty to the LSS 
Academic committee established by Section 43(1) of the LSS Constitution 2018 as amended and 
headed by the Vice-president is illegal and against fundamental Human Rights. 
An order of this honorable court that the resolution reached on the 4thNovember, 2019 is likely to 
infringe on the Fundamental Human right of the members of the 1 st Applicant and should be 
perpetually prevented. 
An order of this honorable court that none of the respondents or any of th eir agencies should 
disallow or hinder any academic activities (especially) tutorials being anchored by the 
1stApplicant for its members. 

24 | P a g e  
 
An order of the court restricting the Executive Council and the LSS House of Representatives 
from making any law restr icting the exclusive facilitation of tutorials to the LSS Academic 
Committee. 
And for such further orders as this honorable court may deem fit to make in the circumstances of 
this case. 
In the course of the proceeding two objections was raised One by the a pplicants and one by the 
respondents which was dealt with decisively by this court. 
On issue 1, the applicants contended that the fundamental human right of expression, freedom of 
thought and freedom of association of the 1st Applicant and its members are to be infringed upon. 
They stratified their contention into the following arguments: 
That the application for breach of fundamental human rights can be brought to the court even 
when the breach is likely to occur and not yet occurred; 
That the applicants and its members‟ freedom of expression is about to be breached; 
That the applicants and its members freedom of thought is about to be breached; 
That the applicants and its members freedom of association is about to be breached. 
On standpoint 1, they argued that applicants can apply to court for a likely breach of any of their 
fundamental human right even when the breach is yet to occur. They place reliance on Section. 
46(1) CFRN 1999 as amended  and Order 2 Rule 1 of the fundame ntal right enforcement 
procedures rules 2009 which reads respectively thus: 
“Any person who alleges that any of the provision of this chapter has been, is been or likely to be 
contravened in any state in relation to him may apply to a high court for redres s” and “any 
person who alleges that any of the provisions of fundamental rights provided for in the 
constitution or African Charter in Human and Peoples” Right (Ratification and Enforcement) Act, 
and to which he‟s entitled, has been, is been, or is likely to be infringed may apply to the court in 
the state where the infringement occurs or likely to occur, for redress.” On this they cited 
CHIJUKA VS MADUEWESI (2011) ALL FWLR ( PT. 586) 517 . They submitted on the 
standpoint that applicants can apply to courts  for the breach of their fundamental rights even 
where such breach is yet to occur. 
On the 2nd standpoint, they averred that applicant and it members right to freedom of expression 
is likely to be breached. They supported this with section 39(1) of the constitution which reads: 

25 | P a g e  
 
“Every person shall be entitled to freedom of expression, including freedom to hold opinions and 
to receive and impart ideas and information without interference.”. They equally made reference 
to black law dictionary (9 thEdition, Bryan A. Garner) where freedom of expression was defined 
to mean “freedom of speech freedom of expression.” and maintained that is undisputable that 
expression and exchange of speech occur in the course of tutoring. They also argued that 
application of the ab ove section to paragraph 8b of the 1 stdeponent affidavit glaringly revealed 
that restriction of tutorials undoubtedly lead to the infringement of the applicant‟s right to 
expression to expression and submit that applicant‟ s right to freedom of expression is about to 
be breached. 
On the 3 rd standpoint, it is averred that the applicant and its members‟ right to freedom of 
thought is about to be breached as reliance is placed on Section 38 of the constitution  which 
reads thus: 
 “Every person shall be entitled to freedom of thought, conscience and religion, including 
freedom to change his religion or belief, and freedom (either alone or in community with others, 
and in public or in private) to manifest and propagate his religion or belief in worship, teaching, 
practice and observance.” Reference was made to the Black‟s law dictionary where it was 
defined as the right to develop, hold or consider facts, view points, or ideas independently of 
others‟ view point. He argued that appli cation of the above provision to paragraph 8b of the 1 st 
deponent will show that the claimant right to freedom of thought will be definitely breach the 
freedom of thought often applicant and it members. He thereafter submitted that the applicants 
and its members‟ freedom of thought is about to be breached. 
On the 4 th standpoint, he contended that the applicant and it members‟ freedom if association is 
about to be breached premising this on the provision of Section 40 of the constitution  which 
reads: 
“Every person shall be entitled to assemble freely and associate with other persons, and in 
particular he may form or belong to any political party, trade union or any other association for 
the protection of his interests”. 
He also cited INEC VS MUSA(2003) 3 NWLR  (Pt. 806) 72. 2 , he defined right of freedom 
from Black‟s law dictionary which stated that: it is the right to join with others in a common 
undertaking that would be lawful if it was pursued individually.”He argued that the policy that is 

26 | P a g e  
 
to be make will render the  aims and objectives of the applicant as contained in section 3(3 and 5) 
of the liberty chamber constitution nugatory. These objectives are produced hereunder 
respectively: 
“To promote and sustain advocacy and academic excellence among members” and “to create a 
forum for freedom of thought, expression and association”. He cited the case of A.G 
FEDERATION VS ABUBAKAR (2007) 10 NWLR (PT.1041) 1 where it was held that it is 
unconstitutional to deny a person of his right to freedom of association. An d submitted that the 
freedom if association of the applicants are about to be breached. 
Applicants maintained that the protection of fundamental human right is so sacred and 
fundamental relying on RANSOME-KUTI VS A.G FEDERATION (1985) 2 NWLR (PT. 6) 
211. They also cited paragraph 3 of the Fundamental Human right enforcement procedure which 
provides “that the constitution, especially chapter 4, as well as African charter, shall be 
expansively and purposely interpreted and applied, with a view to advancing an d realizing the 
rights and freedoms contained in them and affording protections intended by them.” and finally 
submitted on the whole standpoints that the fundamental human right of expression, freedom of 
thought and freedom of association of the first app licant and its members are most likely to be 
fringed upon. 
On issue two, which is whether or not the resolution to restrict the facilitation of tutorials to the 
law student‟s society Academic Committee goes against the spirit of the Law Student‟ Society 
Constitution 2018 as amended. The applicants stratified the issue into two standpoints to wit: 
That the LSS constitution provides as one of its aims and objectives, facilitation of social interest 
in so far as it concerns intellectualism 
That the LSS constit ution guarantees almost its members, the entitlement to enjoy all right(s) 
which are envisaged under our constitution. 
On the 1 st standpoint, it is their contention that the LSS constitution does indeed provide as one 
of its aims and objectives, facilitation of social interest in so far as it concerns intellectualism. On 
this they stand by the aims and objectives of the society as provided by section4(3) and (4)of the 
LSS constitution respectively: 
“To enhance cooperation through exchanged programs with educational bodies, legal institutions, 
as well as, societies within and outside Nigeria in order to broaden the horizon of members.”“To 

27 | P a g e  
 
promote the cultural, intellectual and social activities of members through seminars, symposia, 
public lectures, law debates, moot and mock trials, law dinners, journals and courts visits etc.” he 
averred that literal rule of interpretation is to be used in the above provision and cited inter alia 
ELELU HABEEB VS A.G FEFERATION (2012) All FWLR (Pt. 629) 1011 at 1060 . It is 
further averment that the above provisions contemplate intellectual growth of members of the 
LSS should be enhanced by the LSS and not to be commandeered by them.They also contended 
that the aims and objectives of the LSS has been made justiceable by Section 7(4) of the LSS 
constitution which means that it must be ensured and its breach is enforceable before the court. 
The section reads: 
“Every member shall, except as otherwise provided by this constitution, shall have right to cause 
of action in the Judiciary, compelling any member, officer or organ to conform with the aims and 
objectives set out in CHAPTER TWO of this Constitution.” 
They finally submitted on the standpoint that the LSS constitution provides as one of its aims and 
objectives, facilitation of social interest in so far as it concerns intellectualism. 
On the second standpoint, it is the applicants argument that the the LSS constitution guarantees 
almost its members, the entitlement to enjoy all right(s) which are envisaged under the 
constitution. On this, they lean on the provision of Section 7(5) of the LSS constitution  as given 
leeway to the enjoyment and protection of their right to freedom of expression, freedom of 
thought and freedom of association as contained in Section 39(1), 38(1) and 40 of the Nigerian 
constitution. Section 7(5) of the LSS constitution read thus:  
“Every member shall enjoy and have the right(s) as guaranteed under the constitution of the 
Federal Republic of Nigeria.” 
They averred further that they are entitled t o the enjoyment of fundamental human right by their 
nature of being persons citing SALIU VS SULAIMAN & ORS (2014) AELR 4071 (CA) and 
maintained that the purported act of the respondents will undoubtedly cause interference to the 
applicant enjoyment of the fundamental human right which the former have specifically 
pronounced to be enjoyable by it members in line with Section 7(5) of the LSS Constitution  
and they submitted on this standpoint that the That the LSS constitution guarantees almost its 
members, the entitlement to enjoy all right(s) which are envisaged under our constitution. 

28 | P a g e  
 
Applicants stressed that assuming their submission on the second issue is not availed, it 
nonetheless affect the fact that are incompetence enough of fulfilling the Chapter 2 o f the LSS 
Constitution sequel to the deposition of the 2 nd and 3 rd deponent in their affidavit under 
paragraph 8 and 10 respectively. And it is premised on that the applicants is seeking Justification 
for their non-compliance with the objectives as in enfo rceability has been guaranteed by Section 
7(4) of the LSS constitution. 
They also averred that they‟ve manifested clear effort in ensuring the objectives stated in Section 
4(3) and 4(4)  premised on the depositions of the 2 nd and 3rd deployment in their aff idavit under 
paragraph 9 and 11 respectively, and restricting the applicants of the observance of said 
objectives will be a great disadvantage the law student society in its entirety. It is therefore the 
submissive on the whole issue that the resolution to  restrict the facilitation of tutorials to the law 
students‟ society Academic Committee goes against the spirit of the Law Students‟ Society 
Constitution 2918 and if allowed, would have adverse effect on the members of the law students‟ 
society. 
The respondents‟ counsel in his defence filled a 14 paragraphs counter affidavit deposed to by 
one BAMIDELE JAMALDEEN OLUWATOMI (SAU). Attached to same is a written address 
wherein two issues was couched for determination 
Whether or not resolution has been reached a s regards harmonization of the faculty’s 
tutorials? 
Whether or not Executive Council has the constitutional requisite power to give directives to 
the chambers established in the Law Students’ Society? 
On issue 1, he contended that resolution has not been r eached in respect of harmonization of 
faculty tutorials. He made reference to paragraph 10-13 of their counter-affidavit which is the 
effect that the realization of resolution does not exist whatsoever as same is speculative 
relying on the case of PLATEAU STATE OF NIGERIA VS A.G FEDERATION (2006) 
AFWLR PT. 305 at Pg 590  where it was held that an action which based on speculation 
shouldn‟t be adjudicated upon and such is liable to be stuck out. He argued that although 
pursuant to paragraph 4 of their counter affidavit, meeting held on the on 4 th November 2019 
was summoned by the LSS president on the proposed harmonization of faculty tutorials with 
yield into fruitlessness and as such no resolution can be said to have been reached. He further 

29 | P a g e  
 
his contention that various chambers in the faculty have gone ahead in conducting their 
various activities with tutorials inclusive as shown in paragraph 10 -13 of their counter 
affidavit and based on this the assertion as regards any executive resolution is a speculative 
information capable of not only misleading the respondent and the court but the general 
public of the Law Students‟ Society. He therefore submit that no existence of any resolution 
and urge the court to so hold. 
On issue 2, the learned counsel vehemently averred that the Executive Council, Law 
Students‟ Society has the c onstitutional power to give directive to the chambers established 
in the Law Students‟ Society and he cited Section 40(2) of the LSS Constitution  which is to 
the effect that the LSS Executives has the constitutional power to give directive on policies 
that would be favourable to all members within the society. He argued that it is a 
presumption on popular fact that every undergraduate student of the faculty belongs to a 
chamber established in the society, thus excluding tutorials from the definition of poli cies as 
guaranteed by the LSS constitution would be myopic and void in view of the overriding 
policies as guaranteed in the faculty‟s constitution. He refer the court to the supremacy clause 
contained in section 1 of the LSS Constitution and rely on the ma xim 
jurianovitcuria,OBASANJO VS YUSUF (2004) 9 NWLR (Pt. 877) 144 at 183 and 
ABUBAKAR VS ALHAJI IBRAHIM HASSAN DANKWAMBO & ORS (2015) AELR 
8047 CA.  
He therefore submit that the Executive Council has not in any way breached, or likely to 
breach the applica nt‟s right and has the constitutional power to give directive to chambers 
established in the Law students‟ Society. 
 
RESOLUTION OF ISSUES 
Having dexterously read through both parties‟ briefs and their accompanying affidavits, I 
considered it apt to give opinion based on issues for determination to wit; 
Whether or not resolutions has been reached as regards harmonization of faculty‟s tutorials and 
restriction of same to LSS Academic committee. 
Whether or not fundamental human right of expression, freedom of thought and freedom of 
association of the 1st applicant and its members are to be infringed upon  

30 | P a g e  
 
Whether or not executive council has the constitutional requisite power to give directives to the 
chambers established in the law student‟s society. 
 
Resolution on issue 1 
I deemed it fit to open the floor of my opinion with this issue as I considered it the antecedent to 
the crux of this suit. To answer this question, it is pertinent to embark on a brief sojourn to the 
dictionary to ascertain in its actuality the meaning of the term „resolution‟. According to Black‟s 
law dictionary it is the determination or decision, in regard to its opinion or intention, of a 
deliberative or legislative body, public assembly, town council, board or directors or the like. 
Also a motion or formal proposition offered for adoption by such a body. 
A careful analysis of the above definition with scrutiny would reveal that a valid resolution must 
not be devoid of these two vital elements which are preliminary opinion or intention, an d 
decision or determination. I.e. there must have been a prior opinion before the determination or 
decision of such. This consequential determination is what is referred to as resolution. At this 
juncture, it is sine qua non to properly analyze and evaluat e the relevant paragraphs of both 
parties‟ affidavits in this regard to determine whether a resolution on harmonization and 
restriction of faculty tutorials to LSS Academic Committee had occurred.  
Paragraph 5-8 of the Applicants 1st deponent‟s affidavit reads: 
That I and other Heads of Association and chambers were invited by the president of the Law 
Students‟ Society (Mr. Bamidele Jamaldeen SAU) to a meeting; 
That the meeting came up on the 4th November 2019; 
That  I attended the meeting as the Head of Liberty Chamber; 
That the president of the Law Students‟ Society informed us about a resolution of the executive 
council about; 
The harmonization of the Faculty tutorials. 
The restriction of the tutorials to the Academic Committee. 
While deposition 4- 14 state: 
That I, in conjunction with other members of the Executive Council summoned a meeting which 
came up on the 4th November, 2019. 
That the meeting comprised of other Heads of Associations. 

31 | P a g e  
 
That the rationale behind the meeting was to gather opinion on the  resolution within the 
Executive Council for possible harmonization of the various faculty tutorials. 
That in the meeting I presented the opinion/recommendation to all Heads of Association which 
they agreed to harmonization of the various tutorials 
That only NAMLAS and CLASSFON rejected the idea 
That I vehemently deny the content of paragraph 8 of the applicants‟ affidavit particularly 
averment  b deposed to by one Mustapha Olanrewaju Habeeb 
That up till the moment of deposing of this affidavit, no conclu sion or finality has been made 
with respect to paragraph 6 
That up to this moment, the claimant and other various association have been carrying out 
activities which could be equivalent to tutoring 
That nor have they been stopped to so doing 
That up to this moment the Executive Council has not passed any binding resolution with respect 
to my averment in paragraph 6. 
My harmonization of all the paragraphs in the above affidavit and counter affidavit disclosed that 
a valid resolution is yet to occur. Paragrap h 8 of the respondent is to the effect that they were 
informed of a resolution passed. I vehemently distrust this deposition to mean a resolution as 
there are easy channels of disseminating information of an Executive Resolution than gathering 
Heads of Cha mbers and Associations with the sole aim of informing them about resolution. 
Rational study of paragraph 6 -11 of the respondent  counter affidavit even apart from the denial 
paragraph 9 would revealed what merely occurred was seeking of opinion as regardin g  the said 
tutorial with a view of  deciding on such and this has not been achieved as other chambers have 
gone ahead with their various tutorials. I refused to agree with the applicants that there has been 
a resolution on this. 
Importantly, the counter a ffidavit not only deny a paragraph of the affidavit in support but also 
raised a new fact as seen in paragraph 10 -12 of the respondents‟ counter affidavit which the 
applicant did not file a  further affidavit to contradict and challenge. This invariably im plies an 
admission of the fact deposed to in the counter affidavit. I commend the case of B.E 
ORISAKWE & SON LTD & ANOR. VS AFRIBANK PLC (2012) AELR 1267 (CA), SUIT 
NO: CA/J/11/2005 where it was held that it is a trite principle of law that a party who fai ls to 

32 | P a g e  
 
file a counter affidavit, reply or further and better in order to challenge or controvert the 
depositions in the affidavit in question is deemed to have accepted the fact deposed to the 
affidavit in question. Thus, the unchallenged facts are treated as evidence before this court and I 
hereby resolved in favour of the respondent that  no resolutions has been reached as regards 
harmonization of faculty‟s tutorials and restriction of such to LSS Academic committee. 
Resolution on issue 2 
Fundamental Human Rights are rights which stand above the ordinary laws of the land. Their 
sacredness cannot be overemphasized as they are in fact antecedents to human existence. It is on 
this ground that their protection and enforcement are guaranteed by the constitution. In 
RANSOME-KUTI VS  ATTORNEY-GENERAL OF THE FEDERATION (1985) 7 NWLR 
(PT 6) 211 at 229 -231, it was held that fundamental rights have been enshrined in the 
constitution so that they could be inalienable and immutable to the extent of non immutability of 
the constitution itself.  See also CHROME INSURANCE BROKERS LTD & ORS VS  
EFCC& ORS (2018) LPELR-44818(CA).  And Section 7(5) of the LSS constitution. 
It is settled beyond peradventure that approaching the court for the enforcement of breac h or 
likely breach of fundamental human right is guaranteed under the constitution. See Section 46(1) 
CFRN. However, it is equally a settled law that determination of breach or likely breach of 
fundamental human right is largely based on evaluation of fact s and not dependent on the 
powerful submissions from the forensic arsenal of learned counsels on the law. So the applicants 
had onus of proofing by credible affidavit that their fundamental human rights are likely to be 
breach. See the case of CHROME INSURANCE BROKERS LTD & ORS VS EFCC & ORS 
(2018) LPELR 44818 (CA).   Therefore sequel to my evaluation of both parties‟ affidavits from 
my earlier resolution in concluding that there has not been a resolution on harmonization of 
faculty tutorials, particularly o n the deposition on the respondent counter affidavit that there has 
not been a resolution on the said harmonization of faculty tutorials and  chambers and other 
associations have gone ahead with their various activities similar to tutoring(paragraph 10, 11  
and 12) which was left uncontroverted forced me to place my believe that the total scenarios can 
neither constitute likely breach of the applicants‟ right nor any nor violation of their rights. See 
OGEDENGBE SURAJUDEEN VS UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN & ORS. (2014 )  AELR 367 
(CA). This issue is resolved against the applicants. 

33 | P a g e  
 
 
Resolution on issue 3 
By provision of Section 40(2) of LSS Constitution, the chambers shall conduct their own affairs 
subject to the overriding policies of the Society. It is settled beyond citation of authorities that 
where provision of statute is clear and unambiguous, the court of law is bound to apply literal 
rule of interpretation as interpreting otherwise may contradict the intention of the draftsmen. See 
FRN VS YAU MUHAMMED (2014) AELR  3169 (SC).  Undoubtedly, this provision is 
tantamount to the fact that the Executive Council has the power to give directives to the 
chambers established in the Society, however where these directives or policies is inconsistent 
with the Constitution, they shall be null and void. See Section 1(2) of the LSS Constitution . In 
other words, the Executive Council must bear in mind the aims and objectives of the LSS 
Constitution in the formulation of any policy in order for such to pass the supremacy test. 
Consequence upon my resolutions, the following prayers are hereby granted as prayed, 
Prayer 1, 3 and 5 of the respondents.   
 
 
  
OPINION OF HON. JUDGE TUNJI-LAWAL LAWAL BOLAJI 
I align myself with the facts and history of this case as contained in the lead judgme nt read by 
my learned brother HON. JUDGE Muhammad. 
It has to be stated however that what brought the applicants to this court is the fact that Mr 
Mustapha Olanrewaju Habeeb , the Head of the first applicant attended a meeting called by the 
first respondent where according to him, he and other attendees of the meeting were informed by 
the first respondent of the resolution of the Executive Council on the harmonization of the 
Faculty‟s tutorial and the restriction of the tutorials to the Academic committee. This suit was 
therefore initiated with an application to this court under the FREP RULES 2019 to seek redress 
on the likelihood of breach of fundamental human rights of the f irst applicant members 
guaranteed by the constitution of the Society and the Nigerian Constitution by the purported 
resolution of the Executive Council. In the application, the applicants seek the following reliefs  

34 | P a g e  
 
Both the applicants and the respondents exchanged their brief of argument on the determination 
of the suit. 
 
APPLICANT’S ARGUMENT 
The applicants in their written address distilled two issues for determination, via: 
Whether or not the the fundamental human right of expression, freedom of thought and freedom 
of association of the 1st applicant and its members are to be infringed upon 
Whether or not the resolution to restrict the facilitation of tutorials to law students society 
Academic committee goes against the spirit of the law students society constitution 2018 as 
amended 
The applicants on the first issue argued that fundamental right may be enforced if same has been, 
is being or is likely to be infringed upon relying on the provision of S.46 CFRN 1999 and O2R1 
FREP RULES 2019  and also the case of CHIJUKA v MADUEWESI (2011) ALL FWLR 
(PT. 586) 517.  They further argued that the resolution passed by the Executive is likely to 
infringe on the first applicant members right to freedom of expression, freedom of thought and 
freedom of association relying  on the establishment of these rights in the constitution and the 
meaning ascribed to them in the Blacks Law dictionary and they so submitted. 
The learned counsel to the applicants argued on the second issue that the LSS Constitution 
provides as one of its  aims and objectives, facilitation of social interests in so far as it concerns 
intellectualism. They relied on the provision of S. 4(3&4) LSS Constitution  and relied on the 
case of Nwakire v COP (1992) NWLR (pt 241) 286  that the provisions must be interpr eted 
with literal rule as they are clear and unambiguous. They further argued relying on S.7 (4) of the 
LSS Constitution that every member of LSS has the right to approach the court for any of the 
aims and objectives in chapter 2 LSS Constitution to be com plied with. They argued further that 
the LSS Constitution guarantees all its members, the entitlement to enjoy all right(s) which are 
envisaged under the 1999 Constitution where they relied on S.7(5) of the LSS Constitution . In 
furtherance, they argued as they assumed without conceding that should their argument on the 
issues not be sufficient to avail them, which the respondents are incapable and incompetent in 
facilitating the objectives inferred from sections 4(3) and 4(4) of the LSS Constitution . They 
relied on the depositions in their 2nd and 3rd affidavits in support of their application. They thus 

35 | P a g e  
 
submitted that the resolution restricting the faculty tutorial to the goes against the spirit of the 
law and if allowed would have adverse effects on members of the law students‟ society. 
 
RESPONDENT’S ARGUMENT 
The respondents in their written address distilled two issues to wit: 
Whether or not a resolution has been reached as regards harmonization of the faculty tutorials. 
Whether or not the Executive Counci l has the constitutional requisite power to give directives to 
the chambers established in the Law students' Society. 
On the first issue, they argued that no resolution was reached or purport to be reached as regards 
harmonization of the faculty tutorials.  They relied on paragraphs 10 to 13 of their affidavit in 
support of their defence and argued that there's no resolution in existence and that the existence 
of same is speculative. They further argued relying on PLATEAU STATE OF NIGERIA v 
ATTORNEY GENERAL OF THE FEDERATION (2006) AFWLR OR. 305 at 590  that the 
courts are not established to adjudicate on guesses but on facts and as such an action based on 
speculation could not be adjudicated upon. They argued further that all chambers have been 
conducting their various activities including tutorials without any obstruction from the Executive 
Council. They relied on paragraphs 11 & 12 of their affidavit. It was submitted that no resolution 
is in existence or is likely to be made. 
On the second issue, the learned counsels to the respondents argued that the Executive Council 
of the law students‟ society has the constitutional power to give directives to the chambers 
established in the Law Students Society. They relied on the provisio n of S. 40(2) of the LSS 
Constitution and argued that same must be interpreted literally as it's clear and unambiguous 
relying on the case of THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA v YAU MUHAMMED 
(2014) AELR 3169 (SC). They also argued that the provision is bindi ng on every member and 
every chamber in the society and referred to the supremacy clause contained in S. 1 of the 
society's constitution . They also relied on the maxim JURIA NOVIT CURIA and the case of 
OBASANJO v YUSUF (2004) 9 NWLR (PT. 877) 144 @ 183 . Th ey submitted that the 
Executive Council has not in any way breached or likely to breach the claimants‟ rights and has 
the constitutional power to give directive to chambers established in the law students‟ society  
 
RESOLUTION 

36 | P a g e  
 
The arguments of both parties as above manifest absolute industries. It seems to me however that 
this suit shall be assertively determined if the following issues are laid to rest successfully and 
successively: These issues are: 
Whether or not an executive policy or resolution will ri ghtly be said to be likely to infringe on 
the fundamental human right of a person when it's about to be made (but not yet made) or when 
it's made. 
Whether or not any resolution was made by the respondents as regards harmonization of the 
faculty tutorial and its restriction to Academic committee alone 
On the first issue, I agree totally with the submission of the applicants that it is a trite law which 
has a formidable backing that a person can apply to court to enforce his fundamental right when 
same is breached or is being breached or is likely to be breached. In fact S.46(1) CFRN is more 
than clear on this. As such, a person may seek redress in court when his fundamental right has 
not been infringed upon or being infringed upon but rather, that it's likely to be infringed upon. It 
is safe to state that an act that constitute 'when a fundamental right is likely to be infringed upon' 
will depend on the circumstance of each case. Following this backdrop, the nature of this case as 
one which is premised predominantly on the likelihood of breach of fundamen tal right mandates 
an answer to the question that when will a fundamental right be said to be likely to be breached 
by an executive policy or resolution? When the resolution is about to be made? Or when it's 
made? In answering this question, the meaning of  the word likelihood must be given. In my 
opinion, the ordinary meaning of likelihood is CHANCE. This is fortified with the meaning 
ascribed to the term as given in (https://legal -dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/likelihood) and 
also Merriam Webster dictio nary. Flowing from this, it is reasonable to assert that fundamental 
right of a person is likely to be infringed upon with a thing when such thing is capable of 
creating a chance through which the right could be infringed upon. No doubt, a resolution 
especially in this case an executive policy or resolution is capable of creating a chance for the 
infringement of fundamental human right but only through its implementation. As such, where a 
resolution is made, if its implementation or effect has any element through which a person's right 
may be infringed upon, it is not wrong in law for such a person to approach the court for the 
likelihood of his right to be breached. Thus, a resolution that is yet to be made/passed cannot be 
reasonably said to have the likel ihood of infringing on a person's fundamental right. May I 

37 | P a g e  
 
humbly make an illustration to clarify these positions? When a resolution is passed that no 
person shall enter LR1 Faculty of Law at the hour of 6pm or thereafter till the following morning 
every day. I am right to say that my freedom of movement is likely to be infringed upon by the 
resolution as a student who's known for night class every weekend at LR1, as the resolution will 
permit any of its enforcer to restrict my movement to LR1 for my weeken d night class. As such, 
firstly, my right to freedom of movement will be said 'to have been infringed upon' if there's been 
an occasion when my movement to LR1 for night class was restricted by any enforcer of the 
resolution. Secondly, my right to freedom of movement will be said 'to being infringed upon' at 
the recurrence of my being restricted from entering into the class. Lastly, my right to freedom of 
movement will be said 'to likely be infringed upon' as at that point when the resolution was made 
as it created a chance for my movement to LR1 for night class to be restricted. It seems to me 
that the wrong and  riotious presupposition depicted when it is conceived that a resolution that is 
yet to be made is likely to infringe on a person's fundamental rig ht is that when it's finally made, 
it would occasion outrightly an infringement on a person's right. This is because the fact that a 
resolution is about to be made is neither a chance for my movement to be restricted nor is it 
creating any chance for such.  This illustration and analysis can be said to fit strongly into the 
facts of the case of F.R.A. WILLIAMS v MAJEKODUNMI (1962) 2 SCNLR P.26. Although 
in this case, no issue as to likelihood of fundamental right being infringed upon was raised, 
however, the facts of this case depicting that Chief FRA Williams did not approach the court 
when the state of emergency had not been declared but only approach the court when same was 
declared by the then parliament is a probable pointer to the fact that he only approached the court 
on the basis of his fundamental right likely to be infringed upon by the declaration. It is therefore 
my opinion on the whole of this issue premised on all the reasoning above that an executive 
policy or resolution will rightly be said to be likely to infringe upon the fundamental human right 
of a person  when it's made and not when it's about to be made and I so hold. 
The second issue as couched above is one which bothers on the question of whether or not a 
resolution was made by the respondents on the harmonization of tutorial and its restriction to the 
Academic committee alone. Before I move on to consider this question, it is of utmost 
importance to iterate the fact that the term resolution in dispute in this instant matter will be 
wrongly and unseasonably conceived if it's taken to mean a conclusion of a meeting. The term 

38 | P a g e  
 
resolution in this regard is in my opinion what could be regarded as an executive policy on the 
harmonization of tutorial in the Faculty. In the wordings of the Black ‟s Law dictionary 9th 
edition, the term resolution was defined to mean 
"A main motion that formally expresses the sense, will, or action  of a deliberative assembly (esp. 
a legislative body) (But in this matter an executive body) -A resolution is a highly formal kind of 
main motion,  often containing a preamble, or one or more resolving clauses in the form, 
"Resolved, That  ...."  From this definition of the Black ‟s Law dictionary, a prudent person may 
define a resolution to mean 'a formal verdict or decision of a body having the power to make 
such decision.' For instance, the judgment of a court may be a resolution, an executive policy on 
an issue will qualify as a resolution and so on. As such, what would qualify as a resolution 
premised on the above analysis  in this case is a formal decision of the Executive Council on the 
harmonization of tutorial in the Faculty and its restriction to the academic committee alone. 
Having established this, the question of whether a resolution was made by the Respondents on 
the harmonization of tutorial and its restriction to the academic committee alone is a question of 
evidence as both parties are asking for a declaration on the resolution. It is a settled law that 
declaration is a discretionary relief or remedy but any party  seeking same has the legal burden of 
proof as well as evidential burden of proof under Sections 131 -134 Evidence Act, 2011  as in 
any other civil case, that is proof on the balance of probabilities sometimes styled preponderance 
of evidence. See Chief FaladeOnisaodu& Anor v Chief AsunmoElewuji& Anor SC 223/2000 
How then does a court decide that a fact has been proved on the balance of probability or that 
evidence is preponderant? This question has been rightly answered by Fatayi -Williams J.S.C. (as 
he then was) in the case of Mogagi& Others v Odofin& Others (1978) 4 SC 91 at 93 -95 where 
he gave the following guidelines: 
“In short, before a judge whom evidence is adduced by the parties before him in a civil case 
come to a decision as to which  evidence he acc epts and which evidence he rejects, he should 
first of all put the totality of the testimony adduced by both parties on that imaginary scale: he 
will put the evidence adduced  by the plaintiff on one side of the scale and that by the defendant  
on the other side of the scale and weigh them together. He will then see which is heavier, not by 
the number of witnesses called  by each party, but the quality or the probative value of the 

39 | P a g e  
 
testimony of those witnesses. This is what is meant when it is said that a c ivil case is decided on 
the balance of probabilities.” 
Applying the principle of law adduced above to the present case, when the totality of the 
evidence in form of the 3 affidavits led by the applicants is put on one side of that imaginary 
scale and the totality of the contradictory, conflicting and refuting evidence in form of 1 affidavit 
adduced by the respondents is put on the other side of the scale, it seems to me that the only 
evidence led by the Respondents is heavier and the weight of the evidence ought to go in favour 
of the respondents. The only relevant evidence/affidavit in the applicant ‟s affidavits is the 
affidavit deposed to by Mr Mustapha Olanrewaju Habeeb wherein in paragraph 8 testified the 
assertion of the resolution of the Executive Coun cil about the Harmonization of the faculty 
tutorials and the restriction of the tutorials to the Academic committee. Neither is this testimony 
substantiated or corroborated with any other relevant fact perhaps the resolution itself. The 
affidavit in s upport of the respondents defens e deposed to by the First respondent himself His 
Excellency President Bamidele Jamaldeen  Oluwatomi on the contrary denies in its P.9 the 
testimony of Mr Olanrewaju  Habeeb which by implication means that he (The first respondent) 
did not inform him of any resolution in that regard. This fact is also substantiated with p.10 of 
the same affidavit that no conclusion has even been made as regards the meeting where Mr 
Habeeb testified to have been informed of the resolution. Evaluating the evidence of both parties 
as before this court, it is my finding that while the evidence of the applicants stands alone 
without any corroboration, the evidence of the Respondents in my opinion is corroborated with 
two relevant facts. The relevancy of th e first fact is premised on the provision of S.5 of the E.A 
Act which declares any fact showing the cause or effect of a fact in issue to be relevant. Since the 
fact in issue in this instant matter is whether or not any resolution was made by the responden ts 
as regards harmonization of the faculty tutorial or its restriction to Academic committee, any fact 
showing the effect of the existence or inexistence of the resolution is relevant. I therefore found 
relevant as the effect of the inexistence of the reso lution in dispute the depositions in paragraph 
11 and 12 of the first respondent affidavit that up till the moment when the affidavit was deposed 
to, the applicants and other various associations have been carrying out activities which are 
equivalent to tutorials and that they've never been stopped from doing so. This can be rightly said 
to be a corroboration for the evidence of the respondents. The relevancy of the second fact is 

40 | P a g e  
 
premised on the provision of S.13 of the E.A 2011  which declares relevant any  fact showing 
how an act is usually done when there's a question as to whether such act is done. Since the act in 
question in this case is an executive policy or resolution, hence, any fact showing how the 
Executive Council of the LSS makes its policy or resolution is relevant. Although, there have not 
been many resolutions passed by the previous administrations which could stand as the course of 
business in passing a resolution but I found relevant the policy or resolution made recently by the 
Executive Council of the LSS on dress code where the code was drafted and same was made 
public to all members of the society. Thus, even if same because of its singularity does not 
constitute the course of business of passing a resolution, it shows us how the present 
administration has passed a resolution and is relevant when there's a question of whether or not 
this administration passes a resolution. This fact is not required to be proved as it's a fact which 
the court has no discretion other than to take judicial no tice of it in line with the provision of 
S.122(2 a-d) of the E.A, 2011 . This fact also corroborates the evidence of the respondents. It is 
trite law of evidence that the fact that evidence is admissible does not determine the weight the 
court will attach to it as attachment of weight is done when the evidence is cross examined and if 
there's any corroboration for such an evidence. On the whole, it is my opinion and holding on 
this issue considering the evidence before this court and my evaluation of the evi dence that the 
probability is balanced that no resolution was made by the respondents on the harmonization of 
the faculty tutorial and its restriction to the Academic committee and the evidence of the 
applicants in this regard is hereby rejected. I therefo re find it difficult not to agree with the 
submission of the respondents that   this suit is speculative and the court is not expected and 
cannot make a decision in favour of a case filled with speculation and guesses. See Plateau State 
Of Nigeria v Attorn ey General of The Federation (2006) It is on this note that I hold on the 
question of whether or not the fundamental rights of freedom of expression, freedom of thought 
and freedom of association of the 1st applicant and its members are likely to be infrin ged upon 
that these rights are not likely to be infringed upon since no resolution was reached or made.  
Premised on the strength of my reasoning above, Order 1, 3 & 5 sought by the respondents are 
hereby granted. All other orders and reliefs sought in this suit are hereby refused. 
I commend the erudition of all learned counsels of both parties particularly A.B Abdulraheem, 
A.G LSS and D.R Sarumi, A.G Liberty Chambers. I also commend the erudition of all amicus 

41 | P a g e  
 
curiae who helped this court when necessary du ring the course of proceedings of this case 
particularly A.A. Mustapha SAU. Lastly I charge all advocates of the S.U Bar to always be of 
good conduct whenever they are in court and always remember that this profession is a noble 
profession. May the relationship between the bar and the bench never become riotous. 
 