1 |  P a g e
 
OKWARA & 1 ORS v THE EXECUTIVE PRESIDENT, L.S.S. 
&11 ORS 
CITATION: (2021) LCELR 2021001 
In the Law Students’ Society Court Of Unilorin 
ON THURSDAY, 4TH MARCH, 2021 
Suit No: LSSJ/010/20-21 
Before Their Lordships: 
Hon. Judge Abdulkareem Abdulrazzaq Ketu – Chief Judge, LSS Court of Unilorin 
Hon. Judge Salaam Opeyemi Abdulsalam - Judge, LSS Court of Unilorin 
Hon. Judge Abdulraheem Aliyu Opeyemi - Judge, LSS Court of Unilorin 
 
BETWEEN 
OKWARA LAWRENCE 
AKANNI KAMALDEEN 
Claimants 
 
AND 
THE EXECUTIVE PRESIDENT, LAW STUDENT’S SOCIETY 
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, LAW STUDENTS’ SOCIETY 
ADEKANYE WALLIYULLAH 
ALABI OLUWABUKOLA 
ADETOYEBI ASIWAJU MUSTAPHA 
ABDULAZEEZ ZUBAIDAH 
RAZAQ 
THAOBAN OLORIEGBE 

2 |  P a g e
 
OMOBOLANLE DADA 
HAUWA USMAN 
11. HALIMA 
12. TAOFIK WALIU 
Defendants 
 
RATIO DECIDENDI 
1. ADMINISTRATIVE LAW – LSS PRESIDENT: whether the powers of the LSS president can be delegated 
to other members of the executive 
“I am satisfied that, there is nothing in the section which mandate the president to shoulder all the 
responsibilities imposed on him single-handedly. The provisions of subsection 6,  7 and 10, revealed that his 
powers may be delegated to other members of the society, for the ease and effective management of the 
society” PER ABDULRAHEEM (JLSS) at Pg. 11 
2. COURT – CANNON OF INTERPRETATION: Duty of the court to employ interpretation that will bring 
about justice  
“…This argument is indeed a representative of a cardinal canon of interpretation of statute expressed in the 
Latin word “expressio unis est exclusio alterius" meaning "the express  mention of a thing in the statute, is to 
the exclusion of the others”. To this end, one can say that, since it is omitted from the entire Section 19 that, 
the president can create a new position and appoint members to occupy those positions, it can be sai d to have 
been deliberately excluded by the law. At this point, I ask myself that, even though the application of this 
cannon is satisfactory to ends of the law, is it has well satisfactory to the ends of justice? I answered to the 
negative. On this ground, I decided to seek recourse from another cannon believing the same to be fair and just 
for the determination of this case. The Cannon of Ejusdem Generis. This cannon postulates that when a statute 
has by its provision listed some particular item, but provides leverage that, other items may be accommodated 
is in the same generic as the one listed, such exercise of leverage will be accommodated. See the following 
cases; MEKWUNYE V. EMIRATE AIRLINE (2020) ALL FWLR (PT.1029) 1 S.C; A.G ONDO STATE 
V. A.G FEDERA TION(2002) 9 NWLR (PT772)222: EHUWA V. ONDO STATE INDEPENDENT 
ELECTORAL COMMISSION (2006)ALL FWLR (298) 1299.” PER ABDULRAHEEM (JLSS) at Pg. 13 
3. EVIDENCE – PUBLIC DOCUMENTS: Difference between official documents and public documents  
“In essence, public doc uments are those documents bring into existence, created and made by the public 
officer on public matters and kept or preserved for information of the public and open to public access, 
inspection or use by any person who so desires. However, any document m ade by a public officer in the 
course of duty may be described as an official document. It follows that document through or emanates from a 
public officer or public institution but intended for the private person are not a public document. 
Notwithstanding that they form part of an act or record of an official body.” PER KETU (CJLSS) at Pg. 6 
4. EVIDENCE – PUBLIC DOCUMENTS: Meaning and admissibility of public documents 
“On this basis, for a document to be admissible as a public document, it should not only be made by the public 
officer or on a public matter and it should not only be viewable for public inspection but also it should have 
been brought into existence for that purpose. Support of this can be found in s. 104 of Evidence Act 2011 

3 |  P a g e
 
which defines certifi ed true copy of a public document as that “which every person has right to inspect” In 
essence, public documents are those documents bring into existence, created and made by the public officer on 
public matters and kept or preserved for information of the public and open to public access, inspection or use 
by any person who so desires.” PER KETU (CJLSS) at Pg. 6 
5. INTERPRETATION – LIBERAL INTERPRETATION: liberal interpretation of section 19(10 ) of the 
LSS constitution 
“Hence, I vehemently believe that, by t he inclusion of the provision of Section 19(10) the legislator does not 
intend to act in vain, and that the object is to expand the powers of the president to take further action outside 
what is contained in Section19(1) to (9) as may appear to him necessa ry, so long as it is incidental to the 
performance of his official duties and in fulfilments of the aims and objectives of the law pursuant Section 4 
of the Law student’s society constitution, 2018, (as amended). See Section10(2) of the Interpretation Act,  
Cap192, LFN,1990.” PER ABDULRAHEEM (JLSS) at Pg. 12 
6. INTERPRETATION – LIBERAL INTERPRETATION: the principle of liberal interpretation 
“Also, there is yet a cardinal principle of law in the interpretation of the statute, especially the constitution 
that, the provision of the constitution must be given a liberal and wider interpretation in a bid to allowing the 
essence, object, and the intention of the lawmakers to thrive. See the following cases : SHEMA V. FRN 
(2019) ALL FWLR (PT.976)929 S.C; A.G BAUCHI STATE V. A.G FEDERATION (2019) ALL FWLR 
(1011) 511 S.C; OBLA V. E.F.C.C (2019) ALL FWLR(PT.991) 37 C.A; ” PER ABDULRAHEEM (JLSS) 
at Pg. 11-12 
7. LSS COSNTITUTIONAL LAW – LSS PRESIDENT: powers and limitations of the LSS president 
“It is indeed true that the office o f the president is regulated by the law. And not only that, all the powers, 
rights and duties incidental to his office are derivable only from the provision of the relevant laws. Therefore, 
I agree with the argument of the claimant that, whenever the presi dent acted (as it is in this case) or any 
officers whose office is created by the law, and his powers defined by the law, acts outside those powers, such 
exercise of power will be ultra vires, and as a consequence declared null and void. See the cases of 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA V. ANACHE & 3ORS (2004) LCN/3183: YALAJU AMAYE V. 
AREC ltd &ors (s.c 198/198) (1990) NGSC 70” PER ABDULRAHEEM (JLSS) at Pg. 11 
8. LSS COSNTITUTIONAL LAW – EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF LSS: whether personal aid to the 
president can be regarded as executive officers of the society 
“Deciding on the merits of this case, Section 18 of the Constitution is not a generic provision, but rather, it has 
limited the numbers of Executive officers of the Society and respective duties have been assigned. The Section 
provides; The Executive Council shall comprise of the following officers: The President The Vice President 
The Secretary General The Assistant General Secretary The Financial Secretary The treasurer The Public 
Relations Officer The Social Direc tor The Welfare Director The Sports Director The Attorney General In 
conclusion, the list of Executive Officers by the will of the Constitution is exhaustive and shall not be altered 
except by a proper amendment of the law. Hence, personal aid is personal aid, and God forbid that they 
become an executive officer. The effect is also that, personal aid is not entitled to the salary from the Society's 
pocket, they are precluded from attending Excos meeting and lastly, they must not be found in the usurpation 
of other Executive functions” PER SALAM (JLSS) at Pg. 14 
9. LSS COSNTITUTIONAL LAW – LSS PRESS: whether the LSS press is a public institution 
“On the other hand, LSS Press cannot be stripped off of being a public institution. This is premised on the LSS 
constitution that establishes the body gives it public duty and obligation. SEE section 6 and 9 of the LSS 
constitution. As such, LSS Press is a public institution.” PER KETU (CJLSS) at Pg. 6 
10. LSS COSNTITUTIONAL LAW – NATURE OF THE LSS CONSTITUTION 

4 |  P a g e
 
“Our Constitution like no other knows no equal and it is both the principal work and the framework of all the 
laws that may be reasonably justifiable within the society” PER SALAM (JLSS) at Pg. 13 
11. POWERS AND FUNCTIONS – LSS PRESIDENT: to whom does the LSS President owe responsibility 
“Therefore, it is more apt, the position of the law that the 3rd to 12th defendant is responsible to the 1st 
defendant, who in turn is responsible to the society” PER ABDULRAHEEM (JLSS) at Pg. 12 
12. POWERS AND FUNCTIONS – LSS PRESIDENT: whether the LSS President has powers to delegate his 
functions 
“Also, it is clear from the provision of Section19(6) that, the president can as well delegate his function to any 
members of the society to represent him on a matter affecting the society, as may app ear to him, just and 
necessary for the progress of the society” PER ABDULRAHEEM (JLSS) at Pg. 12 
13. WORDS AND PHRASES – PERSONAL ASSISTANT 
“What this, therefore, suggest to me is that the 1st defendant has appointed from amongst the members of the 
society to assist him as his hand and eyes i.e personal assistance, in the performance of his duties. The word 
personal according to the Blacks Law Dictionary, 8th edition at p.g1179, defined as “the legal status of one, 
regarded by law as a person". On the same toke n, the word personal assistance is, according to 
Wikipedia.com, define as “personal assistant also referred to as personal aide (PA), or personal secretary (PS), 
is a job title describing a person who assists a person with their daily business or personal tasks” PER 
ABDULRAHEEM (JLSS) at Pg. 12 
 
LEAD JUDGMENT DELIVERED BY HON. JUDGE ABDULRAHEEM ALIYU OPEYEMI 
JLSS (Read the lead judgment):  
The factual premise of this case can be compressed as follows; The claimants are bonafide members of the law 
student's society, faculty of law, University of Ilorin. Concerned on the creation of new offices on the 2nd of 
February,2021 and the appointment of 11 members to fill those offices as it is allegedly against the provision of 
the constitution of the law student’s society, 2018 (as amended), instituted this action. The above-named case was 
instituted into this Honorable court through an Originating Motion, dated and filed on the 9th day of February 
2021 wherein the claimant approach this court for the following Orders against the defendant;  
1. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the appointments made by the 1st defendant are 
unlawful and thus unconstitutional. 
2. AN ORDER OF THIS HONORABLE COURT countermanding the appointments through the first defendant 
for the 3rd to 12th defendants.  
3. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT directing the 1st defendant to tender an official apology letter 
to the general public of LSSites concerning his erred commission and omission.  
4. AN INJUNCTION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT rest ricting the defendants from further parading 
themselves as executive officers of the law student’s society.  
5. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE mandating the 3rd to 12th defendant to tender an apology letter.  
6. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT directing the  1st defendant to pay a token of #5000 Naira to 
the claimants, cash or cheque as general damages for inconvenience.  

5 |  P a g e
 
7. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT directing the 3rd to 12th defendant to pay a token of #500 
Naira each to the claimants cash or cheque as a fee for filing this suit.  
8. AND FOR SUCH FURTHER ORDER (S) AS THIS HONOURABLE COURT MAY DEEM FIT TO MAKE 
IN THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THIS CASE.  
Accompanying the Originating Motion is 18 paragraphs of claimants’ affidavits and a written address in suppo rt 
of the originating Motions. The claimants also have in their processes, copies of documents to be relied upon, 
namely;1. The letters of appointment of the 4th defendant Dated on the 2nd of February, 2021. 2. A screen 
captured copy of the Law student’s s ociety, press release titled “President Bamidele Jamaldeen appoints New 
Executive officials.” On the 22nd day of February 2021, the Claimant's counsel sought the leave of the court to 
adopt all the processes as they were filed. In the absence of any object ion, the court granted the leave and the 
processes were deemed adopted. Before going into the argument of the either of the parties, earlier, in this case, 
Claimants' counsel sought to tender certain exhibit to strengthen their case but they were met with an objection 
from the defendants' counsel on the ground that the exhibits sought to be tendered were public document which 
would need certification from the person of custody. 5th Defendant and Counsel to 1st and 2nd defendants 
objected to such documents t hat those documents are public documents. They can only be admissible by 
tendering CTC. Claimants' counsel replied that the maker of the first document sought to be tendered who 
happened to be President of LSS was not a pubic officer within the context of the document so sought to be 
tendered. He referred to s. 18(1) of the Interpretation Act and Case of Bamidele Jamaldeen Oluwatom V. Fin Sec. 
LSS. In their on point of law, the 5th defendant contended that there was no such law that stated that LSS 
President was not a public officer. And that the case that was cited by Counsel to the Claimant was wrongly cited 
in context and content because the proper name and reference of the case are Bamidele Jamaldeen Oluwatomi v. 
Fin Sec. SUJ/002/2018. The case was merel y addressing the privilege of the public officer in the Public Officers 
Act but it did not address the issue of who was a public officer. While objecting to the exhibits, Counsel to 1st 
and 2nd defendant cited s. 9 to the effect that LSS press is a public institution and any document emanated from it 
was a public document. He adopted the argument of the 5th defendant on public document mutis mutandi. In 
reply, to this argument, counsel to claimants contended that the only public institution constitutionally recognized 
were the Executive, House of Reps and Judiciary and that LSS press was not recognized as a public institution 
within LSS constitutional context s. 6 of the LSS constitution was referred to. In the well -detailed ruling 
delivered by Learning Brother, Hon Judge A. A. Ketu CJLSS, he read thus;  
“Looking at the line of contentions, some issues need to be addressed such as public document, LSS press as a 
public institution and position of LSS president as the public officers in the context of the docu ment sought to be 
tendered. But they will be subsumed under an issue; whether or not the documents sought to be tendered are 
public documents? Before addressing the issue of a public document, it is necessary to know whether or not the 
makers/custodians are a public officer or a public institution. Under section 6 and 9 in conjunction with LSS press 
law, the LSS president is a public officer in our jurisdiction, In the case of CHIEF JOHN EZE V. DR. 
COSMAS I. OKECHUKWU (1998) 5 NWLR [548] 43 @ 73 , "A public officer, in my view is the holder of a 
public office. He is in the public sector of the economy as distinct and separate from private sector. He is entitled 
to some remuneration from the public revenue or treasury. He has some authority conferred on him by  law. He 
also has fixed tenure of office which must have some permanency and continuity. Above all, a public officer has 
the power to exercise some amount of sovereign authority or function of government…All these above 
characteristics must be present to v est in a person the status of Public officers”. Without much ado, the office of 
the LSS president consequently vested all these characteristics on the president of LSS. By necessary implication, 

6 |  P a g e
 
any document that emanates from the president office will eit her be an official document or a public document 
depending on the purpose and the intent of such document . On the other hand, LSS Press cannot be stripped off 
of being a public institution. This is premised on the LSS constitution that establishes the body  gives it public 
duty and obligation. SEE section 6 and 9 of the LSS constitution. As such, LSS Press is a public institution . Back 
to the main cross of the matter, what is a public document? Under s. 102 of Evidence Act, a Public document is 
defined as th e document that forms official records or part of the official record of sovereign authority, official 
bodies, public officer among others. This section that defines a public document is not sufficient because other 
necessary elements must be part of the d ocument to make it a public document apart from it being an official 
record. This is because not every document that emanates from a public officer or institution will be regarded as a 
public document. Although, it is obvious that the Evidence Act only det ermines the nature of the document by 
identifying the maker as a public officer. See STATE V. MBAGUE (1972) 2 ECSSLR 462  the necessity of 
additional element for the public document was pronounced by the Court of Appeal in the Ukana V. COP (1995) 
8 NWLR [70 5] 85  where Public document is defined as a document made by a public officer for the public 
making use of it and being able to refer to it, and as to which the public or any person who so desire or having 
anything to do with it has access. SHYLLON ANOR V.  UNIBADAN (2007) 1 NWLR [1014] 1  further held 
that a public document is that document created over a public matter, preserved for the good of the public and 
open for public inspection and use. On this basis, for a document to be admissible as a public document, it should 
not only be made by the public officer or on a public matter and it should not only be viewable for public 
inspection but also it should have been brought into existence for that purpose.  Support of this can be found in s. 
104 of Evidence Act 2011 which defines certified true copy of a public document as that “which every person has 
right to inspect” In essence, public documents are those documents bring into existence, created and made by the 
public officer on public matters and kept or pre served for information of the public and open to public access, 
inspection or use by any person who so desires. However, any document made by a public officer in the course of 
duty may be described as an official document. It follows that document through or emanates from a public 
officer or public institution but intended for the private person are not a public document. Notwithstanding that 
they form part of an act or record of an official body . Similarly, it is clear beyond recondite that for the 
admissibility of a public document, only certified true copy of the document is admissible in law. Provided that 
there is nothing in the law that precludes the admissibility of the original copy of the public document. See, 
KASSIM V. STATE (2017) LPELR – 42586 In the instance case, the letters of appointment of the 4th 
defendant Dated on the 2nd of February, 2021 fall not within the definition of the public document but official 
document while the screen captured copy of the Law student's society, press release ti tled "President Bamidele 
Jamaldeen appoints New Executive officials which emanated from LSS Press as a public body is a public 
document. The letter of appointment is hereby marked "tendered and admitted" while the Press release  is marked 
"tender but reject".” 
Upon the delivery of the ruling, the 5th defendant applied that the court should expunge the letter of appointment 
out of its record because it is a private record that should be tendered by the person with proper custody. He 
further contended that Cou nsel to the claimants had not laid the proper foundation for the admissibility of such 
exhibit being secondary evidence. He referred the Honourable court to section 94 of Evidence Act 2011. Counsel 
to the claimants contended that it is within the discretio nary power to determine whether or not a document is 
produced from proper custody. The cases of Keystone Bank ltd V. A.O. S. Practice (2013) AELR 1501, 
Thomas V. Perryman (1832) 159 ER  among others were cited. In reply on point of law, 5 th defendant state d 
that even in those cases cited, the reason for not tendering the document by the proper person was but in this case 
such reason had not been stated. He further stated that though the court could admit improperly obtained exhibit 

7 |  P a g e
 
under section 14 Evidence  Act recourse must be made to section 15 of the Evidence Act. In its ruling, this 
honourable aligned itself with the position of the 5th defendant and expunged the appointment letter from the 
record of the court for lack of proper foundation. Subsequently, counsel to claimants tendered another copy of the 
appointment letter while laying a proper foundation and stating the reason that the custodian of the document has 
refused to produce the original upon being a notice to that effect and that the document is  sought to be proven 
against the person in the proper custody. On that basis, the exhibit is made admissible and it is marked "tender 
and admitted". It is therefore name exhibit B alongside the certificate tendered in compliance with section 84.  
Couched i n the originating motion for the just determination of this Honourable court is a sole issue, viz; - 
WHETHER OR NOT THE APPOINTMENTS MADE BY THE 1ST DEFENDANT ARE LAWFUL AND 
CONSTITUTIONAL. On the issue, the claimant argued in there written address that th e 1st defendant’s 
purported appointments of other defendants ( i.e. 3 rd to 12th defendant) to hold executive positions is a massive 
contravention of the law, therefore unlawful and constitutional. In buttressing their point, he stratified his 
arguments on the issue into 2 standpoints, viz; - Whether the act of the 1st defendant is ultra vires. - Whether 
Section 19 (10) of the law student’s society constitution validates the acts of the 1 st defendant. On the first 
standpoint, the claimant contends that the  act of the 1st defendant by creating 11 new executive position and 
appointing members of the law student’s society (hereinafter to be referred to as "the society", to occupy them, is 
ultra vires and therefore unconstitutional. They in extension contended that, where powers are granted to any 
authority or officers, such powers must be exercised within the limit as prescribed by the law, otherwise, any act 
in transgression will be ultra vires and therefore declared a nullity. Reliance was pleaded on the case  of 
DOLHERTY V. BALEWA (1961) ALL NCR 604 S. C, WILLIAMS V. MAJEKODUNMI (1962) ALL 
NLR 327, AKINGBADE V. LAGOS TOWN COUNCIL (1955) 21 NCR 90. A.G OGUN STATE AND ORS 
V. A. G. FEDERATION & ORS (1982) 3 NCLR 166 S.C . The Counsel further relied on the provisio n of S. 1 
(1) of LSS Constitution 2018 (as amended), to establishing the supremacy of that law, over all other relevant laws 
invoked. He further argued that, the Constitution has clearly outlined, or specify the powers, rights, duties and 
responsibilities of the president as contained in Section19 (1) to (10) and that any exercise of power outside the 
provisions of the law is Ultra Vires and therefore unconstitutional. The claimants further maintained that the 
offices of which the appointees of the 1 st dep endent were to occupy were the executive positions of the society, 
as same was worded through the letters of appointments issued by the 1st defendant to the 3rd to 12th defendant 
as "services to be offered by the appointees should remain towards the member s of the faculty whom already 
have a constitutional executive body serving them" the foregoing being exhibited in the 1st paragraph, lines 2,3,4 
of the letters, contained in the exhibit relied upon and paragraph 11 of the affidavit relied upon. The claiman ts 
further averred that by the provision of section 19 (1) to (10) the constitution does not confer on the 1st defendant 
to make further appointments outside what is expressly provided by the law. And that such action when 
embarked upon is an abuse of powe r which must be refuted in its entirety. He commended this court to the case 
of MAYOR OF WESTMINSTER V. LONDON WESTERN RAILWAY CO. (1905) AC 246 AT 430.  Also, 
the claimant exhibited in their affidavit particularly paragraphs 13 and 14 that the law student' s society already 
has a constitutionally elected executive council member and that the 1 st defendant has never submitted their 
names for reasons of dereliction of duties, therefore submitting that the action was unnecessary in law. Counsel, 
therefore, submitted on the whole that the action of the 1st defendant is in breach of his constitutional powers and 
urges the court to so hold. On standpoint 2. - Whether Section 19 (10) of the LSS Constitution Validates the acts 
of the 1st defendants. The claimants con tended that the power of the 1st defendant does not by Section 19 (10) 
extend to creating new executive positions. That, it is the law that where provisions of the law are clear and 
unambiguous, the same must be given their literal meanings. Reliance is pl aced on the cases of AIGBOJE 

8 |  P a g e
 
AKIMOUKHUEDE V. DR. PATRICK IFEANYI UBAH & ORS (2014) AELR 5039 C. A; GLOBAL 
EXCELLENCE COMMUNICATION LIMITED V. DUKE (2007) 16 NWLR CPT (059) 22 @ 47.48; 
ZAMFARA STATE HOUSE OF ASS. SERVICE COMM & ORS V. GOVERNOR OF ZAMFARA 
STATE & ORS (2015) AELR 6597 (CA). From the long line of these case, counsel urges this court to dance in 
tune with the ordinary meaning of laws in section 19 (10) of the LSS constitution. And on the same token, he asks 
this court to read the provisions of t he law as a whole and not in isolation of others. He relied on the case of 
MOBIL OIL PLC X. IAL36 INC. US (2000) 6 NWLR (PT. 659) 146 AT 168 . By this he contends that by 
section 19 in its entirety, the law does not envisage the creation of new offices by t he 1 st defendant and such 
powers incidental to his office must be related or sourced from the provision of section 19 (1) to (9) of the LSS 
constitution, 2018 (as amended). Counsel equally borrow wisdom and justification from the situation of things in 
the case of the president of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, that if he can shoulder all that responsibilities 
saddled on him by the constitution, the president of the Law student’s society, who has lesser responsibilities to 
lesser number of people, should  be able to shoulder same. Claimant submitted that the provision of Section 19 
(10) of the LSS constitution does not validate the act of the 1st defendant and he urged this court to so hold. To 
this end, I shall now be dealt on the defence forthwith. The d efendant through their defence to the claimant 
Originating Motion has also prayed this honourable court for the following reliefs;  
1. A DECLARATION OF THIS COURT that the defendant can lawfully appoint the 3rd to 12th defendants.  
2. A DECLARATION OF THIS  COURT that the appointments made by the 1st defendant are lawful and 
constitution.  
3. A DECLARATION OF THIS COURT that the said appointments require no confirmation by the LSS House 
of representatives before it would become valid and constitutional. 
4. A N ORDER OF THIS CORT mandating the claimants TO PAY THE SUM OF ONE THOUSAND AND 
FIVE HUNDRED NAIRA (#1500) EACH TO THE FIRST AND SECOND DEFENDANTS. 5. AND FOR 
SUCH OTHER ORDERS AND DECLARATION THAT THIS COURT MAY DEEM FIT IN THE 
CIRMCUMSTANCEOF THIS CASE.  
Attached to the defence are a 12 paragraphs affidavit and a written address in support of Defendant defence to the 
Claimants Originating Motion. Also, On the 23rd day of February 2021, the 1st and 2nd Defendant’s counsel 
sought the leave of the court to a dopt their defence as filed. The leave was granted and the defence was deemed 
adopted. Counsel to the 1st and 2nd defendant called 1st defendant as a witness to tender certain exhibit, upon 
fulfilment of legal condition for tendering of evidence, letter of  appointment of 3rd to 12th defendant was 
tendered, they were marked tender and admitted, they were named Exhibit B -K 1st defendant said those 
documents were made for the appointment of 10 people as SPECIAL ASSISTANCE to himself, to serve him. He 
said that he had not appointed any person into the executive post rather he only make the appoint for those people 
to help him personally as the President of LSS. With little amendment concerning where faculty or faculty of law 
was used, to be amended to LSS, 5th d efendant relied on the defence of 1st and 2nd defendants. He further 
referred the court to section 8 (5-6) of the LSS constitution and also the aim and objectives contained in s 4 (1) of 
the LSS constitution and all other provision in the defence. In their  argument vide the written address, the 
defendant couched 2 issues for the determination before this Honorable court, which are; 1. Whether or not the 
3rd to 12th defendants as appointed by the 1st defendant is envisaged to assume the status of the executi ve 
positions thereby becoming members of the executive council of the faculty. 2. Whether by the provision of 
Section 19 (10) of the law student constitution (as amended) the 1st defendant can lawfully appoint the 3rd to 

9 |  P a g e
 
12th defendants. From the defence, they mounted huge contention against the claims of the claimants while 
holding that the purported appointments of the 3 rd to12th defendants were not in contemplation of filling the 
executive positions nor to usurp the functions of the executive council of  the faculty. For ease of argument, the 
defendant stratified there issue one into 2 standpoints, viz;1. That the claim in the claimant's affidavit that the 
appointees are to take up an executive position in the faculty is absurd and speculative. 2. That li teral 
interpretation should be employed in interpreting the contents of the letters of appointment. On the first 
standpoint, the defendant contended that holding that the new appointees are to take up executive position is but a 
mere speculation and a comp lete absurdity. That having recourse to the letters of appointment, issued by the 1st 
defendant, there is at no point from the document where the newly appointed officers were suggested to take up 
the executive positions, rather, it was explicit that the appointees are to take up position has the personal assistant 
to the 1st defendant. The defendant submitted that the above fact as claimed by the claimant is at best speculative 
and assumption -based. And on the attitude of the court to speculative claims, c ounsel relied on the case of 
CHINWEZE V. MAZI (1989) 1 NWR (PT 97)254; he further avers that the court, in the case of 
PLATEAU STATE OF NIGERIA V. A.G OF FEDERATION (2006) JELR 10194 (SC),  he submitted that 
court does not act on speculative claims where th ey are not supported by facts or very low facts. Counsel 
submitted in this regard that the newly appointed officers by the 1st defendant are not envisaged to take up an 
executive position within the meaning of the contents of the appointment letters. On the 2nd point, the defendants 
further required this court to adopt the literal interpretation in the interpretation of the letters of appointment. 
Counsel relied on the case of NIKA FISHING CO. LTD v. LAVINA CORP (2008) 16 NWLR (PT1114) 509. 
Furthermore, the defendant added that the question of the interpretation of any document is a matter of law and 
that the court of law is bound to give credence to the contents of the document as counsel relied on the following 
cases; AFRO TECH TECH. SERVICES (NIG) LTD V. M.I.A & SONS LTD (2000)15 NWLR (PT692) 
730;UNILIFE DEV. LTD V. ADESHINGBIN (2001) 4 NWLR (PT.704)609; AGBAREH V. MIMRA 
(2008)2 NWLR (PT.1071) 378; ADETOUN OLADEJI (NIG.) LTD V. NIGERIAN BREWERIES 
PLC(2007)5 NWLR (PT.1027)415. On the above-stated grounds, counsel submitted that the literal interpretation 
should be adopted in the interpretation of the letters of appointment and on the whole, the new appointees were 
not envisaged to take up, executive positions, within the meaning of the contents of the letter s. On the second 
issue, the defendant argues the second issue via two standpoints viz; 
1. That the action of the 1st defendant is lawful and constitutional.  
2. That the appointment made in this case requires no confirmation by the LSS House of Representatives before it 
would become valid and constitutional.  
On the first standpoint, the defence contends that the action of the 1st defendant, in this case, is constitutional and 
lawful. He asks the court to look into the provision of Section 19(10) of the LSS  Constitution, arguing that the 
constitution bestowed the president a wider power to be exercised so long as it is incidental to his offices. He 
submitted further that, it is a trite principle of law that, where the wordings of the statutes (as in this cas e) are 
clear and unambiguous, such provisions must be interpreted in line with its literal meaning. He relied on the 
following cases; KETSON KOMPLEX INTERNATIONAL LTD V. BENDEL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PLANNING AUTHORITY (1993)2 NWLR (PT275)332; ADEBIYI V. BABALOLA  (1993) 1 NWLR 
(PT267) 1. And that the essence of interpretation of the statute is to determine the intention of the lawmakers and 
nothing more should be embarked upon. ABUBAKAR V. NASAMU (2012)17 NWLR (PT1330)58; 
ADEGUNDE V. O.S.H.A (2015) 8 NWLR (PT1451) 314; GANA V. S.D.P (2019)11 NWLR (PT 1684)510. 
Counsel submitted that the court should adopt the literal meaning of the provision of Section 19(10) in the 

10 |  P a g e
 
interpretation of the same. On the second standpoint, counsel avers that the appointment of the 3rd t o 
12thdefendant is not that, which requires confirmation by the House of Representatives for validity. He 
maintained that the appointees were merely special aids to the 1st defendant. And that, they are responsible only 
to the president and not to the facu lty, therefore confirmation by the House is not, on this basis, a requisite 
condition. Counsel relied on the case of PDP V. INEC (2014) 17 NWLR (PT1437) 525; AKERODOLU V. 
MIMIKO (2014)1 NWLR (PT.1388)402.  He submitted on these averments and urges the court  to so hold. In 
their defence, the 4th defendants pray this honourable courts for the following reliefs;  
1. A DECLARATION TO THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the appointment made by the 1st defendant is 
lawful and thus constitutional.  
2. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOU RABLE COURT directing the 1st and 2nd claimants to tender an apology 
letter to the general public of LSSsites.  
3. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT mandating the 1st and 2nd claimant to tender an apology 
letter each to the 4th defendants. 
4. AN ORDER OF T HIS HONOURABLE COURT directing the 1st and 2nd claimant to pay a token of #5000 
naira to the 4th defendants in cash as general damages for inconveniences and litigation fee.  
5. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT directing each of the 1st and 2nd claimants to purchase and 
deliver 7plates of item7, mixed with chicken on 7 different days to the 4th Defendant on or before the school 
general continuous assessment.  
6. AND FOR SUCH FURTHER ORDER(S) AS THIS HONOURABLE COURT MAY DEEM FIT TO MAKE 
IN THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THIS CASE.  
The statement of defence is a counter affidavit of 15 paragraphs and a written address to rebut the claims of the 
claimants in their Originating Motion. The 4th defendant couched a single issue for determination before this 
honourable cour t, that is; - Whether or not the appointment made by the 1st defendant is lawful and 
constitutional. And from this sole issue was distilled a sole standpoint. The 4th defendant avers that the act of the 
1st defendant in appointing the 4th defendant is not in contravention of the law, as same was exercised within the 
purview of section 19(10), to appoint the 4th defendants as his assistant answerable to him and not to the entire 
law student's society. Counsel relied on the provision Section19 (10) Law studen t's society constitution, and the 
case of DOHERTY V. BALEWA (1961) ALL NLR 604 S.C; WILLIAMS V. MAJEKODUNMI (1962) ALL 
NLR 327; AKINGBADE V. LAGOS TOWN COUNCIL (1985) 4 NLR 90.  Further, the defendant avers that 
the interpretation of the constitution must be given a broader and liberal meaning as not to defeat the purpose and 
essence for which it was designed. He relied on EKPENHIO v. EGBDON (1993)7 NWLR (PT 308)717 at 727. 
Counsel equally maintained that the appointment of the 4th defendant was according to  the powers granted to the 
1st defendant in the realization objectives of the law under Section 4 of the LSS Constitution. Counsel relied on 
the case of A.G ONDO STATE v. A.G FEDERATION (2002)9 NWLR (PT772)222 at325 . Also, Counsel 
invokes the provision of section 10 (2) of the interpretation Act, cap 192, law of the Federal Republic of Nigeria 
1990 to support his argument. He, therefore, submits on the issue and the whole, that the act of the 1st defendants 
are within the scope of his constitutionally defen d powers and is therefore valid. Counsel adopted their processes 
on the 1st of March, 2021 as filed.In their reply on point of law, the claimant objected to the claim that the court 
does not rely on speculative claims as proffered by the defendant and urge  the court to discountenanced with the 

11 |  P a g e
 
case of CHINWEZE V. MASI (SUPRA)  maintaining that the case is distinguishable from the present fact at 
hand. Other contentions of the claimants being a reaffirmation of what has been included in the Claimant written 
address. The claimant submits on the issues and urges the court to so hold them. OPINION In my consideration 
of the arguments canvassed by the counsels from both sides, I have decided to distil 3 issues for the just 
determination of this case, which are; - Whether or not the appointment made by the 1st defendant is lawful and 
constitutional? - Whether or not the letter of appointment discloses sufficient grounds for holding the new 
appointees have occupied the executive council? - Whether or not the provisio n of Section 19(10) can 
accommodate the action of the 1 stdefendant? ISSUE 1 One the first issue, on the 2nd of February, 2021, the 1st 
defendant appointed 11 members of the society to occupy some position to assist him in carrying out the exercise 
of functions of his office. However, the question which bothers my mind is that does the president rarely has the 
power to make such appointments ? It is indeed true that the office of the president is regulated by the law. And 
not only that, all the powers, rights and duties incidental to his office are derivable only from the provision of the 
relevant laws. Therefore, I agree with the argument of the claimant that, whenever the president acted (as it is in 
this case) or any officers whose office is created by the law, and his powers defined by the law, acts outside those 
powers, such exercise of power will be ultra vires, and as a consequence declared null and void. See the cases of 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA V. ANACHE & 3ORS (2004) LCN/3183: YALAJU AMAYE V. 
AREC ltd &ors (s.c 198/198) (1990) NGSC 70 . It however behoves this Honorable court to determine the 
validity or otherwise of the exercise of powers of the 1st defendant. Thus, by the general provision of Section19 
of the LSS constitution, 2018 (as amended), t he president is bestowed with far -reaching powers and duties to be 
exercised to effectively discharge the functions of his office. It is indeed a reasonable argument that, by the 
community reading of Section 19 (1)-(10), it is not stated anywhere, expressly, that the president may create new 
offices of his own and appoints members to occupy those offices. However, holding to this effect will be 
subjecting the constitution to restricted or narrowed interpretation, and this may yet be tantamount to shunning 
the efficacious legal effect of Section19 (10) of the LSS constitution, 2018. According to Section 19 (10) which 
reads as follows; “he shall perform such other duties as may be incidental to his office” The claimants urge this 
court to interpret the above s ubsection as a brother and friend to other subsections of the entire section. Even at 
that, I am satisfied that, there is nothing in the section which mandate the president to shoulder all the 
responsibilities imposed on him single -handedly. The provisions  of subsection 6,7 and 10, revealed that his 
powers may be delegated to other members of the society, for the ease and effective management of the society . 
On the same token, the contention that, the president has not at any point submitted the names of any members of 
the executive council for dereliction of duties, and as such couldn’t appoint new members, having failed to 
exhaust the options open to him by the law, could not persuade me for long, since a careful perusal of 
Section19(4) reveals that the pr esident is only granted powers to refer any act of indiscipline of members to the 
House of Representatives and he is not mandated to do so. In other words, the action of the president to make 
appropriate orders concerning the appointment of new officers, c ould not be pre -conditioned on the existence or 
otherwise of the act of indiscipline of the members, subject to the provision of Section19(4) of the LSS 
Constitution. Further, it puzzled my mind at first that, if to say the newly appointed members are to t ake up 
responsibilities akin to that of the members of the executive council, there would of have been a case of 
conflicting interest, under which the action of the 1 st defendant would have no doubt be declared a nullity. 
However, upon a careful perusal of  the provision of sections21 to 29, it is clear to my mind that, the newly 
created offices are either complementary to the existing ones or distinct from it. Also, there is yet a cardinal 
principle of law in the interpretation of the statute, especially th e constitution that, the provision of the 
constitution must be given a liberal and wider interpretation in a bid to allowing the essence, object, and the 
intention of the lawmakers to thrive. See the following cases : SHEMA V. FRN (2019) ALL FWLR 

12 |  P a g e
 
(PT.976)929 S.C; A.G BAUCHI STATE V. A.G FEDERATION (2019) ALL FWLR (1011) 511 S.C; OBLA 
V. E.F.C.C (2019) ALL FWLR(PT.991) 37 C.A ; It is indeed the true position of the law that, where the 
provision of the law is clear and unambiguous, the court must give to them t heir ordinary literal interpretation. 
See the following cases: SULE V. STATE (2018)ALL FWLR (PT.953) 164 S.C; SHEMA V. FRN (2019) 
ALL FWLR (PT.976)929 S.C; BUARI V. YABO (2019)ALL FWLR (PT.1007) 855 S.C;  Hence, I 
vehemently believe that, by the inclusion of the provision of Section 19(10) the legislator does not intend to act in 
vain, and that the object is to expand the powers of the president to take further action outside what is contained 
in Section19(1) to (9) as may appear to him necessary, so long as it is incidental to the performance of his official 
duties and in fulfilments of the aims and objectives of the law pursuant Section 4 of the Law student’s society 
constitution, 2018, (as amended) . See Section10(2) of the Interpretation Act, Cap192, LFN,1 990. It is on this 
basis that, I hold the action of 1st defendant, valid, lawful and constitutional. And I hereby resolve issue one in 
favour of the defendant. ISSUE 2 By the Exhibit B to H which was tendered and received in evidence by this 
Honorable Cour t, the defendant discloses that the letter of appointment which was the only document of 
appointment of the 3rd to12th defendant into the office never specifies that the new appointees were to take up 
positions as members of the executive council. The law is that letters and documents alike, were being the subject 
of interpretation must be given their ordinary simple meaning as intended by the parties to it. See the case of 
KAYDEE VENTURES LTD V. THE HON. MINISTER OF FEDERAL CAPITAL TERRITORY (2010) 
2-3 S.C (PT III) 1. And that, there is no need to go on a voyage of discovery where the intention of the makers is 
starring on the face of the documents. See KAYDEE VENTURES LTD V. THE HON. MINISTER OF 
FEDERAL CAPITAL TERRITORY (SUPRA); K. LINE INCORPORATION V. K .R INT. (NIG.) LTD 
(1993)5 NWLR (PT292) 159 AT 178.  Therefore, upon careful consideration of the document, I have found the 
content of the documents read as follows; “…I hereby write to inform you of my decision to appoint you as my 
assistant…please note t hat except as otherwise directed, you are to be directly accountable to my chief of 
staff…”What this, therefore, suggest to me is that the 1st defendant has appointed from amongst the members of 
the society to assist him as his hand and eyes i.e personal a ssistance, in the performance of his duties. The word 
personal according to the Blacks Law Dictionary, 8th edition at p.g1179, defined as “the legal status of one, 
regarded by law as a person". On the same token, the word personal assistance is, according to Wikipedia.com, 
define as “personal assistant also referred to as personal aide (PA), or personal secretary (PS), is a job title 
describing a person who assists a person with their daily business or personal tasks.” Also, it is clear from the 
provision of Section19(6) that, the president can as well delegate his function to any members of the society to 
represent him on a matter affecting the society, as may appear to him, just and necessary for the progress of the 
society. Furthermore, the claimant contended that the word “Toward” in the letter must mean that, the service for 
which the 3rd to 12th defendants are appointed is towards the society, therefore they are responsible to the 
society. However, as much as I may want to align myself with this line of  argument, it is yet a clear principle of 
the law that, where powers are delegated to a person, the responsibilities and accountability are generally held as 
against the donor of the powers. See: A.G KADUNA STATE V. HASSAN (1985) 2 NWLR (PT8)483 S.C.  
Also, the donor has unlimited power to allow the exercise of the power or to revert it to himself at any time, as 
the power of the donee cannot grow over that of the donor . Therefore, it is more apt, the position of the law that 
the 3rd to 12th defendant is res ponsible to the 1st defendant, who in turn is responsible to the society . On a final 
note, upon a careful perusal of the content of the letters of appointment, I can hardly find any wordings on the 
face of the Exhibit suggesting that the newly appointed of ficers, appointed by the 1st defendant are designated to 
assume the offices as members of the executive council. And since the claimant has failed to substantiate this 
claim from their reply filed with a valid point of law, I submit that the claim that the  appointees of the 1st 
defendant are to assume the position as members of the executive is at best speculative and only inferable. And, 

13 |  P a g e
 
on the attitude of the court on inferences concerning the interpretation of the content of documents. See the 
following cases; ANYIM V. STATE (2020) ALL FWLR (PT.1032) 647 S.C; CHINWEZ V. MAZI(1989)1 
NWLR (PT97) 254; DADA V. STATE (2018) ALL FWLR (PT.920) 77 S.C.  On this ground, I submit that the 
content of Exhibit B to H (i.e the letter of appointment) does not disclose su fficient ground as to conclude that, 
the 3rd to 12th defendants are appointed to assume the offices as the executive council members. I hereby resolve 
issue two in favour of the defendant. ISSUE 3 Ad valorem, Section 19(10) which reads as follows; “he shal l 
perform such other duties as may be incidental to his office” On the argument that the implication of Section 
19(10) must be sourced from other subsections to the entire section. It is indeed a reasonable argument that since 
the provision of Section19, p articularly subsections (1) to (9) has specified the powers of the president. 1st 
defendant, anything outside the exercise of the power is ultra vires and of no effect whatsoever . This argument is 
indeed a representative of a cardinal canon of interpretation of statute expressed in the Latin word “expressio unis 
est exclusio alterius" meaning "the express mention of a thing in the statute, is to the exclusion of the others”. To 
this end, one can say that, since it is omitted from the entire Section 19 that,  the president can create a new 
position and appoint members to occupy those positions, it can be said to have been deliberately excluded by the 
law. At this point, I ask myself that, even though the application of this cannon is satisfactory to ends of th e law, 
is it has well satisfactory to the ends of justice? I answered to the negative. On this ground, I decided to seek 
recourse from another cannon believing the same to be fair and just for the determination of this case. The 
Cannon of Ejusdem Generis. This cannon postulates that when a statute has by its provision listed some particular 
item, but provides leverage that, other items may be accommodated is in the same generic as the one listed, such 
exercise of leverage will be accommodated. See the follo wing cases; MEKWUNYE V. EMIRATE AIRLINE 
(2020) ALL FWLR (PT.1029) 1 S.C; A.G ONDO STATE V. A.G FEDERATION(2002) 9 NWLR 
(PT772)222: EHUWA V. ONDO STATE INDEPENDENT ELECTORAL COMMISSION (2006)ALL 
FWLR (298) 1299. It is on the factual premise of the above I s ubmit that, by the provision of Section 19 which 
specify the powers of the president but provided leverage for the accommodation of other powers, and duties, so 
long as same is incidental to the performance of the function of his office. Such action when e mbarked upon is 
regular, valid, well-grounded in law and constitutional. And I so hold. I hereby resolve issue three (3) in favour of 
the defendant. The prayer 1, 2 and 4 of 1st and 2nd Defendant are granted with N1000 as the cost of litigation for 
each of the defendant. Prayer 1 and 3 of 4th defendant are granted with N1000 as the cost of litigation against 
claimant. All other prayers not granted are rejected.  
 
OPINION OF HON. JUDGE SALAM ABDULSALAM OPEYEMI JLSS  
I have the prerogative to read in draft th e just delivered judgment by my learned brother, ABDULRAHEEM ALI 
OPEYEMI JLSS, I do not doubt his reasoning and conclusion, more and more that his view is living large in the 
opposite position of the law. However, I am driven to contribute more wisdom to t his careful judgment. 
Aboveboard, I have couched one issue for the just determination of this case:  Whether or not the appointment 
made by the Executive President of the Law Students’ Society is ultra vires? In other to simplify this broad issue, 
I have taken extra steps to stratify the above issue into two standpoints as follows: i. Whether or not the President 
has the power to appoint personal aid? ii. Whether or not the power of appointment has any limit? From 
standpoint one, I have enjoyed the privile ge to peruse the Constitution of the Law Students’ Society . Our 
Constitution like no other knows no equal, and it is both the principal work and the framework of all the laws that 
may be reasonably justifiable within the society . See Section 1 of the CFRN alone, Chapter One of the LSS 
Constitution accordingly and the cases of Nabiu v. State (1980) 9 -11 S.C. 130 at 229. In the art of constitutional 

14 |  P a g e
 
interpretation, it is no more open to the judge to limit his judgement only to a singular provision of the law this 
may do well in misleading the interest of justice. By the combined effect of the provisions of Section 4 and 
Section 19 of the Constitution, I am left with no other option as legally proper than to hold that the appointment 
of aid made by the Presiden t is not only valid but valid according to the Constitution. Section 19 (10) provides 
that; “He shall perform such other duties as may be incidental to his office” Flowing directly from the spirit of the 
Constitution, I must say that the president has been  donated with enormous powers which include the power to 
coordinate the activities of the Executive Council to effectively achieve the aims and objectives of the Society. It 
is trite that, if a person has a right, he must of necessity have the means to vin dicate it. Therefore, if the President 
is obliged to perform executive functions, he must be availed with every reasonable means to ensure that same is 
being carried out. See generally, Section 10(2) of the Interpretation Act, Cap 192, Laws of the Federati on of 
Nigeria, 1990 and the case of Attorney General Ondo State v. Attorney General of the Federation. On the second 
standpoint, conceding that the President has the power to appoint aid, it is equally my pure submission that, the 
power shall be exercised within the limit of the law. No doubt, the power must be exercised judicially and 
judiciously. See Section 4 of the Constitution. Also, the averment in Para -5 of the Claimants affidavit, that is, 'to 
be responsible and serve as an aid to me in discharging and fulfilling my constitutional duties', must not be 
contravened. I am afraid that anything outside the constitutional limitation cannot stand. Even if it stands, it can 
only stand as barbarous ultra vires. See INAKOJU v. ADELEKE (SC 272/2006)[2007] NGSC 30. Deciding on 
the merits of this case, Section 18 of the Constitution is not a generic provision, but rather, it has limited the 
numbers of Executive officers of the Society and respective duties have been assigned. The Section provides; The 
Executive Co uncil shall comprise of the following officers: The President The Vice President The Secretary 
General The Assistant General Secretary The Financial Secretary The treasurer The Public Relations Officer The 
Social Director The Welfare Director The Sports Di rector The Attorney General In conclusion, the list of 
Executive Officers by the will of the Constitution is exhaustive and shall not be altered except by a proper 
amendment of the law. Hence, personal aid is personal aid, and God forbid that they become an executive officer. 
The effect is also that, personal aid is not entitled to the salary from the Society's pocket, they are precluded from 
attending Excos meeting and lastly, they must not be found in the usurpation of other Executive functions .I 
hereby resolve the issue in favour of the Defendants, and I grants all prayers sought by the 1st , 2 nd and 5th 
Defendants excluding prayer four, and ONLY prayer one of the 4th Defendants is granted.  
HON. JUDGE ABDULKAREEM ABDURRAZZAQ KETU CJLSS  
I had a preview of the lead judgment just delivered by my learned brother, HON. JUDGE ABDULRAHEEM ALI 
OPEYEMI JLSS. I agree entirely with the reasoning and conclusion reached by him. I adopt all his reasoning and 
opinions as mine including the orders and declarations.  
 
 
APPEARANCES 
 L. O OKWARA (lead counsel) with AKANNI KAMALDEEN K. O OLADOJA, for the claimants  
ISIAKA AZEEZ for 1st and 2nd defendants, ASIWAJU MUSTAPHA ADETOYEBI (Senior Advocate of the 
Union) 5th defendant I S. MUHAMMED with B. E. OGUNGBE for 4th defendant  
AMICI CUREA  

15 |  P a g e
 
TAJUDEEN HABEEBULLAH (Senior Advocate of the Union) 