 
1 |  P a g e
 
ONIKEKE MUSA & 2 ORS V LIBERTY CHAMBERS 
CITATION: (2019) LCELR 1819004 
In the Law Students’ Society Court Of Unilorin 
ON THURSDAY, 2nd  May, 2019. 
Suit No: LSSJ/009/19 
Before Their Lordships: 
Hon. Judge Abdulquadir Abdullahi CJLSS (presided and read lead judgment)  
Hon. Judge Shuaib Olawale Teslim JLSS 
Hon. Judge Shuaib Muhammad JLSS 
 
BETWEEN 
ONIKEKE MUSA 
OKWARA LAWRENCE  
ALI ABDULMUIZ 
 Claimants 
 
AND 
 
LIBERTY CHAMBERS  
Defendant 
 
 
 

 
2 |  P a g e
 
RATIO DECIDENDI : 
1. COURT: ENFORCEMENT OF RIGHTS UNKNOWN TO LAW 
 It is a trite principle of law that there can only be a breach of right where there is an 
existence of such right. This follows the popular principle of law expounded in the 
celebrated case of UAC v. MACFOY (1961) 3 W.LR. (P.C) 1405 @ 1409  where the 
court held to the effect that something cannot be put on nothing and be expected to stand. 
Hence, since it has been resolve d by this Honourable Court that the claimants are not 
members of the liberty chambers, it follows that they cannot lay claim to the rights  
guaranteed by the Liberty chambers constitution to Members which includes right to vote 
and be voted for, which is provided for in Section 5 (1) of the liberty chambers 
constitution. Since the constitution guarantees this right to members only, it follows  that 
a person who is not a member cannot lay claim to such right, nor can it be breached or 
enforced.- PER Abdulquadri Abdullah CJLSS, at Pg. 15 and 16 
2. COURT : INTERPRETATION OF A STATUTE 
In ascertaining the true meaning of the provisions of a statute  or the Constitution, the 
Constitution and the statute being interpreted must be read as a whole and construed so. 
See ACTION CONGRESS AC & ANOR VS INEC (2007) 12 NWLR (PART 1048) 
222 at 259 .It is necessary to bear in mind that the liberty chambers constit ution is a 
subsidiary legislation which operates side by side with the Law Students’ Society 
Constitution which is also subsidiary legislation to faculty of law students' handbook 
which is also subsidiary legislation to University of Ilorin students' infor mation and 
regulations handbook. All shall be read together in order to give effect and meaning to 
the rights and obligation of individuals. It is settled principle of interpretation that a 
provision of the Constitution or a statute should not be interpret ed in isolation but rather 
in the context of the Constitution or a statute as a whole. Therefore, in construing the 
provisions of a section of a statute the whole of the statute must be read in order to 
determine the meaning and effect of the words being i nterpreted. See  BUHARI & 
ANOR V. OBASANJO & ORS (2005) 13 NWLR (PT.941) 1 AT 219.  - PER 
Muhammed Shuaib JLSS, at Pg. 19 
3. COURT: THE PROPER REACTION OF THE COURT TOWARDS A  POORLY 
DRAFTED BRIEF 

 
3 |  P a g e
 
Although it is settled law that no matter how bad, faulty or inelegant a brief may be, a 
court would not  close its eyes to the fact of its existence and consideration of the issues 
raised, though poorly, in order to effectively do substantial justice to the parti es.- PER 
Muhammed Shuaib JLSS, at Pg. 20 
4. EFFECT OF MATRICULATION  
At this juncture, it is apposite to underline that Matriculation is a stage that confirms the 
completeness of studentship. Before a student scales through the stage of matriculation 
successfully, his faculty or course of study might be changed as part  of the university’s 
admission processes. It is the matriculation exercise that grants to each student his official 
identification number in the university, otherwise called, matriculation number. In light 
of this, the requirement of matriculation of a stu dent before he can be deemed reliable for 
a leadership post is important and cannot be eroded and taken lightly. - PER Shuaib 
Olawale Teslim JLSS, at Pg. 19 
5. LIBERTY CHAMBERS CONSTITUTIONAL INTERPRETATION: 
 As it is trite that “An expression used in a subsidiary instrument has the same meaning 
as in the Act conferring power to make the instrument”  I rely on section 19(1) of the 
Interpretation Act cap 192 LFN 1990.  I hereby interpret the word “Matriculated 
undergraduate student” in section 4(1) of liberty chamber to mean a student who has 
taken the matriculation oath signed by the regist rar.- PER Muhammed Shu aib JLSS, at 
Pg. 20 
6. LIBERTY CHAMBERS CONSTITUTIONAL INTERPRETATION : WHO IS A 
MEMBER OF LIBERTY CHAMBERS 
The provisions of the Liberty chambers constitution  that define the memberships of the 
chambers. S.4 (1) of the Liberty chambers constitution provides to the effect that; 
“A member shall be a matriculated undergraduate student of the faculty of Law 
University of Ilorin”. 
It is very clear from this provision of the Liberty chambers constitution  that only 
matriculated undergraduate students of Faculty of Law the University of Ilorin qualify for 
membership of Liberty chambers. Thus, the constitutional definition of membership of 
liberty chambers include three key elements which are; 
A. Matriculation 

 
4 |  P a g e
 
B. Undergraduate student 
C.  Student of Faculty of Law, University of Ilorin. 
These conditions are conjunctive, not disjunctive. They must all be complete and present 
in a person before such a person can qualify for the membership of Liberty chambers.  
The absence of one of these elements in a person nullifies the membership of such person. 
-  PER Abdulquadri Abdullah CJLSS, at Pg. 15 
7. PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE: QUALITIES OF A GOOD BRIEF  
My lords, permit me to say this, I need not remind the defendant's counsel that the 
hallmarks of a good brief of argument is accuracy, brevity and clarity. Briefs are meant to 
assist the court in the administration and promotion of the course of jus tice. A good brief 
does not allow for verbosity and must be a succinct statement of a party's argument. A 
well-crafted brief makes for joyful reading while a badly crafted one is tedious and 
laborious to understand and it is like a bad story which leaves a n audience disgruntled, 
disgusted and unhappy.- PER Muhammed Shuaib JLSS, at Pg. 20 
8. UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN ACT: WHO IS A STUDENT OF THE UNIVERSITY 
OF ILORIN.  
To determine this, recourse shall be made to the relevant provisions of our laws.  Rule 15 
of the University of Ilorin Student Handbook is very clear as to the status of any 
person who is yet to complete the matriculation process and take the matriculation oath. 
It provides thus; 
15a. Only students who have satisfied the minimum educational requirement of the 
University of Ilorin an offer ed final admission and then matriculated as students of the 
university. On the matriculation day, each fresh student swears to the Matriculation Oath 
which shall be provided by the University (contained in Appendix B). Violation of the 
matriculation oath is a very serious offence which shall lead to disciplinary actions. 
15b. Each student is assigned a matriculation Number upon registration. No official 
student paper or document is regarded as complete or valid unless it carries the correct 
matriculation nu mber.A community reading of the above provisions of Rule 15 will 
reveal that a student, who is yet to undergo the matriculation ceremony, take the 
matriculation oath and be assigned a matriculation number, cannot be regarded as a 
registered and duly admit ted student of the University. Hence, such a person cannot lay 

 
5 |  P a g e
 
claim to the rights and privileges available to a student duly registered, admitted and 
matriculated because he is not one yet. -Per Abdulquadri Abdullah , CJLSS, at Pg. 14 and 
15 
9. WORDS AND PHRASES: MATRICULATION 
The word matriculation can be defined as the formal process of entering a university. The 
Black's Law dictionary 6 th edition @ P. 978 defines the word matriculation as “ the 
process of admission to membership as by examination or enrollment in a society or 
college”. The Oxford Concise English Dictionary 9 th Edition at page 841 also defines the 
word matriculation as “ to be enrolled at a university or college” . Thus, using the literal 
rule of interpretation, it can be deduced that matriculation is a process, a series of 
procedures, and not just one procedure, but many connected proc edures which a newly 
admitted student goes through, to become a full member and student of a college or 
university. It is a process which starts with the offer of provisional admission, includes 
other procedures, and ends with the taking of the matriculati on oath by the student and 
issuance of an identification number by the school authority which is known as the 
matriculation number. - WORDS AND PHRASES - DEFINITION OF THE WORD 
"Matriculation". -PER AbdulQuadri Abdullah CJLSS, at Pg. 14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LEAD JUDGEMENT DELIVERED BY HON. JUDGE ABDULQUADIR 
ABDULLAHI CJLSS  
The claimants are members of liberty chamber while the defendant is the l iberty chamber. A 
weekly congress of the chamber was held on 22 nd of January, 2019 where the congress resolved 
that yet to be matriculated 100 level and direct entry mode student members of the defendant 
chamber cannot be appointed to the office of PRO II on the ground that they have not been 
matriculated at the time the congress was held. It was on this ground, the claimants by an 

 
6 |  P a g e
 
originating summons dated 31st of January, 2019 claimed before this Honourable Court, the 
following reliefs against the defendant:  
A DECLARATION OF THIS COURT  that the provisions of sections 4(1) and 17(2) of the 
Liberty Constitution are to be interpreted literally. 
A DECLARATION OF THIS COURT  nullifying the decision reached by the defendant’s 
chambers congress held on the 22nd day of January 2019. 
AN ORDER OF THIS COURT  mandating the defendant to conduct an election for the 100 
level student members of the chamber to be elected into the office of PRO II of the chamber 
under section 17(2) of the Liberty Constitution. 
AN ORDER OF THIS COURT mandating the defendant to pay the sum of two thousand naira 
to the claimant as cost of litigation. 
AND FOR SUCH OTHER ORDERS AND DECLARATIONS THIS COURT  shall deem fit 
on the circumstance of this case. 
On 23 rd of April, 2019, the date for hear ing, J.O Baiyeshea, counsel for claimants, adopted the 
claimant’s brief and urged this Honourable Court to so hold. The claimants’ counsel distilled a 
sole issue for determination by this Honourable Court as follow; 
 Whether the provisions of section 4(1) a nd section 17(2) of the liberty chamber 
constitution are to be interpreted using the literal rule 
The claimants’ counsel stratified the issue on two standpoints which are; 
 That the word “matriculated” as used in section 4(1) and section 17(2) of the libert y 
chamber constitution is clear and unambiguous and has the same meaning as “enrolment”, 
“admission” and/or “entering”. 
 That the literal rule is to be applied in interpreting section 4(1) an d section 17(2) of the 
liberty Chamber constitution. 
He submitted  on the first standpoint that the word “matriculated” as used in section 4(1) and 
section 17(2) of the liberty chamber constitution is clear and unambiguous and has the same 
meaning as “enrolment”, “admission” and “entering” and not the mere matriculated c eremony. 
He argued further citing 8 th edition of Black’s law dictionary, 9 th edition of the Oxford Concise 
English Dictionary, 7 th edition of Abridge version of the Black’s Law Dictionary, 2 nd edition of 
the Jowitt’s dictionary of English law inter alia  that the word matriculation connotes admission 
and all other procedures that follow are mere formalities.  

 
7 |  P a g e
 
On the second standpoint, the claimants’ counsel submitted that the literal rule is to be applied in 
interpreting section 4(1) and section 17(2) of th e liberty chamber constitution. They relied on 
PDP v INEC (2014) 17 NWLR (pt. 1437) 525 . Claimants’ counsel argued further that provision 
in statutes must be given their simple and direct meaning and not to go outside the words in 
search of interpretation which is convenient to the court or parties even when the provision of the 
statute is hard, relying on LAWAL TOYEEB ABDULRASSAQ V. THE ELECTORAL 
COMMISSION, LAW STUDENT SOCIETY AND 2 ORS (SUJ/012/2016). It was urged that 
issue one be resolved in favour of the claimant. 
On 24th of January, 2019, the claimants’ counsel by motion on notice 24 th of April, 2019 prayed 
for an order of this Honourable Court granting the request of the claimants to amend their 
pleadings and for such other orders as this court deem fit on the circumstance of this case. 
The defendant’s counsel objected to the adoption of the process on the ground that it was grossly 
incompetent. He argued that “ the motion on notice was not signed and assuming without 
conceding that it was signed, the signature was not indicated by any of the claimants’ counsel 
which render it fundamentally defective and grossly incompetent”  They relied on the cases of 
ONWUKWE V IWUCHUKWU 2017 LPELR 41584 C.A and ZAKARI V NIGERIAN 
ARMY AND ORS 2015 LPELR 24721. They further argued that non-signing or non-disclosure 
of the signer of a court process is not irregularity which can be waived because it robs the court 
of its jurisdiction and any proceeding without jurisdiction is null and void. They relied on the 
case of ALIM NIG. LTD. V. UBA 2013 LPELR 19768. They prayed the motion be struck out. 
Replying on the objection, the claimants’ counsel argued that “ where counsel for a firm sign a 
process collectively, such process should not be struck out but should be taking into ac count as 
mere procedural irregularity except it is objected to timeously”  
The court while upholding the argument of the defendant stated that “ it is on the record of 
this court that the motion on notice which sought to amend the originating summons filed by 
the claimants’ counsel is signed but the signer was not indicated. Where the court processes 
are prepared by more than one legal practitioner , there is significant need to indicate the 
signatory of the court process to avoid confusion of who actually appends his signature or 
whether the person who signs it has his name on the roll and not merely signed by pepper 
seller” the court relied on the case of RAJI V. UNILORIN 2018 LPELR 44692 SC and 

 
8 |  P a g e
 
MUHAMMED SESAN ISMAIL V. THE JUDICIARY, LAW STUDENT SOCIETY 
LSSJ/007/2019. The motion was struck out for being grossly incompetent. 
Subsequently, the claimants’ counsel by motion on notice 24 th of April, 2019 prayed for an order 
of this Honourable Court granting the request of the claimants to amend their pleadings and for 
such other orders as the court deem fit on the circumstance of this case. 
The defendant’s counsel objected to the adoption of the process on the ground that it was grossly 
incompetent. They argued that the designation of the counsels was not indicated. He further 
argued that non -disclosure of counsels’ address/designation is not irregularity which can be 
waived because it robs the court of its jurisdiction and any proceeding without jurisdiction is null 
and void. They relied on the case of ONWUKWE V IWUCHUKWU supra 
The claimant in their reply to the objection submitted that by Order 2 rule 5 and Form E of LSS 
Court rules, 2019 does not make p rovision for the address/designation of the claimant, thus, 
same can be jettisoned. 
In its ruling, the court stated that by the provision of section 40(6) of Law Student 
Constitution, 2018 which provides that “ without prejudice to any of the provision of t his 
constitution, no member of the society shall be allowed to appear before the judiciary, except 
he is duly registered member of any of the chamber”  without the address of the counsel 
indicating which of the constitutionally recognized chambers the couns el is attached to, the 
court will be robbed off of its jurisdiction to entertain the matter. The Court stated that the 
fact that Order 2 rule 5 and form E does not expressly and explicitly stated that the 
designation of counsel must be stated does not mean  the designation can be jettisoned. The 
court struck out the motion on notice for being grossly incompetent.  
On 25th of January, 2019, the claimants’ counsel by motion on notice dated 25 th of April, 2019 
prayed for an order of this Honourable Court granting the request of the claimants to amend their 
pleadings and for such other orders as this court deem fit on the circumstance of this case. 
J.O Baiyeshea, counsel for claimants, adopts the motion on notice where a sole issue was 
distilled for determination as follow; 
 Whether or not the order for amendment of pleadings as sought by the claimants should 
be granted? 
On the issue, the claimants’ counsel submitted that it is within the jurisdiction of the court to 
grant the motion to amend their faulty pleadings  for the purpose of determining the real question 

 
9 |  P a g e
 
in controversy between the parties to any proceedings where the proposed amendment is neither 
fraudulent nor intended to overreach the parties. They relied on IKWERNUM V. 
LORKUMBUR (2002) 11 NWLR (Pt. 777) 52 at 71 -72, NNB PLC V. DENCLAG 
LIMITED (2005) 4NWLR (PT. 916) 549 @ 602 among others.  
By an objection dated 25 th January, 2019, the defendant prayed for an order of this Honourable 
Court declaring that the affidavit in support of the claimant’s motion on  notice does not disclose 
reasonable cause of action, an order of striking out the motion on notice for want of jurisdiction, 
an order mandating the claimant to pay a sum of five hundred naira for as cost of litigating the 
objection and other orders the court deem fit to make.  
A sole issue whether or not this Honourable Court has the requisite jurisdiction to grant the 
application of motion on notice as filed by the claimant was distilled for determination. 
On the issue, the defendant’s counsel submitted t hat it is elementary in law that a cause of action 
denotes a group of operative facts or factual situation which gives rise or entitles a person to seek 
and obtain a remedy in court for another person. They relied on the case o f BRAWEL LINES 
LTD V DEE-DAMOR DEVELOPMENT CO. LTD CA/B/214/2012. They further argued that 
no paragraph in claimant’s affidavit reveals reasonable cause of action citing CHIJOIOKE V 
SOETAN (2006) 11 NWLR (Pt. 990) 179 thus they submitted that “ where an action discloses 
no cause of act ion which is the combination of facts which give rise to the right of action, the 
case cannot be heard on its merits as it robs the court of its jurisdiction”. 
In reply to the objection raised, the claimants’ counsel submitted that a reasonable cause of 
action is determined by the right that accrues to the litigant which entitles him to the judgment of 
the court. They relied on the case of  RINCO CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LTD V. 
VEEPEE IND. LTD. & ANOR 2015 LPELR 2949 S.C . They argued further that there is no 
need for a cause of action in an interlocutory motion of this nature.  
The defendant further replied to the claimant’s reply to the objection by citing the case of 
ONWUKWE V IWUCHUKWU  supra that for the court to determine the application of 
reasonable cause o f action, such should affect court process or processes and court process 
include writ of summons, originating summons, originating process, notices, petition, orders, 
motions, summons, warrant and all document or written communication of which service is 
required. 

 
10 |  P a g e
 
The court held as follows “ it has been stated that a cause of action is made up of the factual 
situation which gives the right to judicial relief(s), I rely on the case of RINCO 
CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LTD V VEEPEE INDUSTRY LTD AND ANOR 2015 LPELR 
2949 SC. A cause of action need not only exist in the originating processes but all other 
processes before the court because it will be funny to have an action before the cause without 
need for it, it will not only waste the time of the court but it also te lls on the professionalism of 
the legal practice. A careful perusal of claimant affidavit in support of the motion on notice 
particularly paragraphs 3 and 6 disclose not only a cause of action but also a reasonable 
cause of action. 
An Amendment is nothing  but the correction of an error committed in any process, pleading 
or proceeding at law or in equity and which is done either as of course or by the consent of 
parties or upon notice to the court in which the proceeding is pending. The object of courts is 
to decide the right of the parties and not to punish them for mistakes they may make in the 
conduct of their cases by deciding otherwise than in accordance with their rights. There is no 
kind of mistake or error which if not fraudulent or intended to overr each, the courts cannot 
correct if this can be done without injustice to the other party. Blunders may occur and 
nowadays they occur with disturbing regularity, but all the same, the courts should not be 
stampeded into chasing the shadows of these blunders  rather than facing the substance of the 
justice of the case. There is no law which says that a court cannot grant leave to amend in 
order to regularize or remedy originating summons or other court processes. The heydays of 
technicalities are now gone for good. The court is more interested in doing substantial justice. 
Reliance on technicalities leads to injustice. The judicial process malfunctions and is 
discredited when it is bogged down by technicalities and thrives on a technicality. At all times, 
therefore, technicalities should be eschewed and the determination to do substantial justice 
should remain the preferred option". N.D.D.C. V. PRECISION ASSOCIATION LTD (2006) 
16 NWLR (PT.2006) 527 AT 559 -560. Also, there is no rule of this court, that I am awar e of, 
that limits the number of times a party can bring an application to regularize the processes in 
court in particular, application to amend processes already filed, even when the matter is fixed 
for hearing or during. 
“It is a trite law that amendment can be sought at any stage of the proceeding provided such 
amendment will not occasion injustice to the defendant and was not brought in bad faith and 

 
11 |  P a g e
 
neither meant to overreach the defendant. See AKANINWO V. NSIRIM (2008) ALL FWLR 
(PT. 410) 610 AT PP. 655 – 658. As long as the purpose of or reason for such an amendment 
is to ensure that the complaints of the claimants against the proceedings in question are laid 
and ventilated before the court. Indeed, the fact that brief of arguments have been filed and 
exchanged and the case is virtually ready or has been fixed for the hearing will not prevent the 
court from exercising its undoubted discretion to allow an amendment both to the originating 
process and the w ritten address. The important consideration must be that the amendment 
would serve the ends of justice and fairness, and the other party can be compensated by costs. 
See FIRST BANK OF NIG. PLC. VS. MAY MEDICAL CLINICS & DIAGNOSTIC CENTRE 
LTD (2001)6 SCM 63 ; (2001) 9 NWLR (PT.717) 28; PHARMATEK INDUSTRIAL 
PROJECTS LTD. VS BAYO OJO (1996) 1 NWLR (PT.359) 337 AT 338.  
In other words, as long as an amendment being sought is not fraudulent, vexatious, or meant 
to overreach or merely annoy or embarrass the other Party, the court will always be inclined, 
in the best interest of justice and fairness to exercise its discretion in favour of the application 
to amend process already filed. it is worthy to state that courts are bound to refuse an 
application to amend whe re such amendment is in bad faith, will occasion injustice to the 
other party and overreaching in nature. In my consideration of the application of amendment, 
I am of the firm opinion that the amendment if granted cannot occasion injustice but instead 
serve the end of justice and fairness”  
On 29 th of January, 2019, claimants’ amended additional issue two was adopted where another 
issue was distilled; 
 Whether or not rights of the claimants have been breached having regards to the rights 
vested on them in section 17(2) of the Liberty Chambers’ Constitution.  
The issue was stratified into two standpoints via 
 That the right of the claimants has been breached. 
 That the claimants are entitled to remedy. 
On the first standpoint, it was submitted that the defenda nt has breached the sacred provision of 
section 4(1) and 17(2) of the constitution of Liberty chambers constitution due to the fact that the 
claimants were disentitled to be elected to the designated office. It was also urged that issue two 
be resolved in favour of the claimant.   

 
12 |  P a g e
 
On the second standpoint, they submitted relying on the case of BELLO V. ATTORNEY 
GENERAL OF OYO STATE (1986) 5 NWLR (PT. 45) 828 that whenever there is a wrong 
there must be a remedy. The court was urged to enforce the right of the claimant breached. 
I shall dwell on the defence forthwith, the defendant distilled two issues for their defence, via; 
 Whether having regard to the combined provisions of the fa culty of law Students’ 
Handbook (2018), item 12(a) of the University of Ilorin Students’ Information and 
Regulation Handbook, section 4(1) of the liberty chambers (as amended 2015), section 5 
of the  constitution of the law Students/Society (2018), students who are yet to be 
matriculated are bona fide  students of the university and can be members of liberty 
chambers? 
 Whether having regard to the provision of sections 4(1), 5(1)(b) and 17(2) of the 
constitution liberty chambers (as amended 2015), non -members are eligible to be voted 
or appointed in an election of liberty chambers? 
The first issue was stratified into two standpoints via; 
 That the students who are yet to be matriculated are not a bonafide student of the University 
of Ilorin. 
 That “shall” when used in a statute literally connotes mandatorily and compulsion. 
On the first standpoint, they submitted that students who are yet to be matriculated are not a 
bona fide student of the University of I lorin and cannot be a member of liberty chamber. They 
relied on item 12(a) of the University of Ilorin students’ information and Regulations 
Handbook (2018).  They argued further that section 4 of liberty Chamber Constitution  
provides that only matriculated  undergraduate student of the university can be a member of 
liberty chamber. They urge the court to use the literal rule of interpretation relying on the case 
of ICPC OF THE STUDENT UNION, UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN V. THE PRESIDENT, 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF SCIENCE & ORS supra. 
On the second standpoint, they submitted that the word “shall” as used in section 4 of Liberty 
Constitution connotes commandment. They rely on the case of OGIDI V. STATE (2005) 
NWLR (PT. 918) 286 @ 327. They argued further that the provisi on of the constitution is 
supreme relying on section 1(1) of Liberty Chamber Constitution. 
On issue two, they submitted that non -members are not eligible to be voted or appointed in an 
election of liberty chambers. They relied on 4(1), 5(1), 17(2) of the L iberty Constitution and 

 
13 |  P a g e
 
cases of ALHAJI ATIKU ABUBAKAR V. THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OF THE 
FEDERATION & ORS (2007) 6NWLR (PT.1031) 626 inter alia. 
Having carefully perused all the court process of counsels on both sides as filed before this 
Honourable Court and  the oral arguments of both counsels, I would briefly like to address the 
issues as concluded by the counsels on the opposing sides. The claimant counsels have 
concluded two issues before this Honourable Court which goes thus; 
 Whether the provision of S. 4(1) and 17(2) of the Liberty chamber and to be interpreted 
using the literal rule.? 
 Whether or not the right of the claimants have been breached having regard to the rights 
vested in them in S.17(2) of the Liberty chambers? 
The defendants, on the other ha nd, have also couched two issues before this honourable court 
which goes thus;  
 Whether having regard to the combined provisions of the faculty of law students’ 
Handbook (2018), Item 12(a) of the University of Ilorin Students’ Information and 
Regulations Handbook, Section 4(1) of the constitution of Liberty chambers (as amended 
2015), section 5 of the constitution of the Law Students society (2018), students who are 
yet to be matriculated are bona fide students of the university and can be members of 
liberty chambers? 
 Whether having regard to the provisions of S.4(1), 5(1)(b) and 17(2) of the constitution of 
Liberty chambers (as amended 2015), non -members are eligible to be voted or appointed 
in an election of Liberty chambers? 
For a proper and efficient det ermination of this suit, I have merged these issues and retouched 
them into two new issues which encompasses both the claimants and defendant issues which go 
thus; 
 Whether or not, having regard to the relevant provisions of the law, students who are yet 
to be matriculated can qualify as a member of Liberty Chamber? 
 Whether or not the claimant's rights have been breached by the defendant chambers? 
On issue 1, the position of the law is settled on matriculation and status of students who are yet 
to be matriculated. As beautifully argued by the claimant counsels, it is time that matriculation is 
usually covered with merriment, and it is not wrong to include on this basis that matriculation is 
a ceremony. The real question that comes to the mind of legally think ing person is now, is it just 

 
14 |  P a g e
 
a ceremony? Well, to answer the question, one does not need the microscopic lens of Sir Isaac 
Newton, nor does one need to carry out the popular scientific Litmus tests invented by J. L. Gay -
Lussac. This is because the answer to the question is very simple and it appears to be quite 
straightforward. The answer is No! An emphatic No!! 
The word matriculation can be defined as the formal process of entering a university. The Black's 
Law dictionary 6th edition @ P. 978 defines the word matriculation as “ the process of admission 
to membership as by examination or enrollment in a society or college” . The Oxford Concise 
English Dictionary 9th Edition at page 841 also defines the word matriculation as “ to be enrolled 
at a university or college” . Thus, using the literal rule of interpretation, it can be deduced that 
matriculation is a process, a series of procedures, and not just one procedure, but many 
connected procedures which a newly admitted student goes  through, to become a full member 
and student of a college or university. It is a process which starts with the offer of provisional 
admission, includes other procedures, and ends with the taking of the matriculation oath by the 
student and issuance of an identification number by the school authority which is known as the 
matriculation number. 
After having examined what matriculation is, it is important to determine the status of a person 
who has not been fully matriculated i.e. has not completed the matric ulation process and taken 
the matriculation oath and whether such a person can be a member of liberty chamber?  To 
determine this, recourse shall be made to the relevant provisions of our laws.  Rule 15 of the 
University of Ilorin Student Handbook is very clear as to the status of any person who is yet to 
complete the matriculation process and take the matriculation oath,. It provides thus; 
15a. Only students who have satisfied the minimum educational requirement of the 
University of Ilorin an offered final admission and then matriculated as students of the 
university. On the matriculation day, each fresh student swears to the Matriculation Oath 
which shall be provided by the University (contained in Appendix B). Violation of the 
matriculation oath is a very serious offence which shall lead to disciplinary actions. 
15b. Each student is assigned a matriculation Number upon registration. No official 
student paper or document is regarded as complete or valid unless it carries the correct 
matriculation number. 
A community reading of the above provisions of Rule 15 will reveal that a student, who is yet to 
undergo the matriculation ceremony, take the matriculation oath and be assigned a matriculation 

 
15 |  P a g e
 
number, cannot be regarded as a registered and duly admi tted student of the University. Hence, 
such a person cannot lay claim to the rights and privileges available to a student duly registered, 
admitted and matriculated because he is not one yet.  
As regard whether or not such student who is yet to be matricul ated, take the matriculation oath 
and assigned matriculation number can be members of liberty chambers, it is necessary to make 
recourse to the liberty chamber constitution which is the fons et origo  of the chambers, 
particularly, The provisions of the Lib erty chambers constitution that define the memberships of 
the chambers. S.4 (1) of the Liberty chambers constitution provides to the effect that; 
“A member shall be a matriculated undergraduate student of the faculty of Law 
University of Ilorin”. 
It is very clear from this provision of the Liberty chambers constitution that only matriculated 
undergraduate students of Faculty of Law the University of Ilorin qualify for membership of 
Liberty chambers. Thus, the constitutional definition of membership of li berty chambers include 
three key elements which are; 
a. Matriculation    b. Undergraduate student   c. Student Faculty of Law, University of Ilorin. 
These conditions are conjunctive, not disjunctive. They must all be complete and present in a 
person before such a person can qualify for the membership of Liberty chambers. The absence of 
one of these elements in a person nullifies the membership of such person.  
Flowing from the proceeding analysis, it is very convenient and correct for me to hold on this 
issue that the defendants who are 100 level students yet to be matriculated, yet to take the 
matriculation oath and yet to be assigned a matriculation number cannot be members of the 
Liberty chambers. As such, this issue is resolved in favour of the defendant s and against the 
claimant. 
On issue 2, it is a trite principle of law that there can only be a breach of right where there is an 
existence of such right. This follows the popular principle of law expounded in the celebrated 
case of UAC v. MACFOY (1961) 3 W.LR. (P.C) 1405 @ 1409 where the court held to the effect 
that something cannot be put on nothing and be expected to stand. Hence, since it has been 
resolved by this Honourable Court that the claimants are not members of the liberty chambers, it 
follows that they cannot lay claim to the rights guaranteed by the Liberty chambers constitution 
to Members which includes right to vote and be voted for, which is provided for in Section 5 (1) 
of the liberty chambers constitution. Since the constitution guarantees this right to members only, 

 
16 |  P a g e
 
it follows that a person who is not a member cannot lay claim to such right, nor can it be 
breached or enforced. 
As such, this Honourable Court hereby holds that no right of the claimants has been breached by 
the defendant chambers. Issue 2 also is resolved in favour of the defendants against the claimants.  
This Honourable Court hereby grants the second (2nd), third (3rd), fourth (4th) and fifth (5th) 
prayers of the defendants sought for in the reply of the defendant to the claim ant’s originating 
summon. All other prayers sought for by the parties to this case are refused. 
OPPINION OF HON JUDGE SHUAIB OLAWALE TESLIM JLSS 
The fulcrum of this case rocks back and forth on the issues couched by the claimant counsel in 
their amended pleading and as equally adopted by the defendant counsel in their defence which 
goes thus; 
 Whether or not the rights of the claimants in this case as conferred by section 17(2) of the 
Liberty Chambers’ Constitution 
The claimant contended that the liberty chambers, by preventing some of its members who were 
from 100 level from participating in the chambers electoral process as contestants for the office 
of Public Relation Officer II (PRO II) on the ground that the aff ected students at that time have 
not undergone the matriculation ceremony, is an infringement of the claimant’s right guaranteed 
under the Liberty Chambers constitution. 
The claimants' counsel in arguing his case relied on the provisions of section 17 of t he Liberty 
Chambers Constitution (to be hereinafter referred to as “The Constitution”) which exclusively 
allocated the office of PRO II to any member of the chambers from 100 level class. The 
chambers, having failed to accommodate a 100 level student to th e office of the PRO II, counsel 
further contended that a legal wrong has been committed by the chambers, and thus, in line with 
the maxim, ubi jus ibi remedium, claimants, in this case, are deserving of a legal remedy. 
The defendant counsel in their defence as filed against the claimants amended pleadings argued 
that all the rights enjoyable by members of the chambers as contained under section 51 of the 
constitution, including the rights to vote and be voted for in any approved election of the libert y 
chambers unless as otherwise stated by the Liberty chambers constitution [section 5(1)b], are 
only for members of the chambers who have been matriculated as undergraduate students of the 
Faculty Of Law, University Of Ilorin. 

 
17 |  P a g e
 
Having weighed the arguments of both counsel, this decision shall be anchored on the sole issue 
couched by the claimant’s counsel in their amended pleadings and has been similarly adopted by 
counsel to the defendants in their defence pleadings in addition to another issue. 
Whether or not the rights of the claimants in this case as conferred by section 17(2) of the 
Liberty Chambers’ Constitution has been breached by the defendant chambers. 
A corollary to the right to freedom of association is the duty of members of an association to be 
bound by the rules and regulations of the association he/ she belongs to. This duty is even more 
compelling when membership of such association is voluntary like in this instant case. It is 
presumed that a voluntary association of individuals has been foun ded on the basis that each 
individual member sheds their rights, submit and contribute such rights to the upliftment of their 
association and furtherance of its objectives based on an agreed framework. This framework is 
the guiding rules and regulations, b ye-laws, rules of conduct etc., that govern the association 
with the view that the common interest of all of its members will be better protected. See the 
case of LAKESIDE COLONY AND HUTTERIAN BRETHREN V. HOFER (1992) 3 SCR 
165.  
It is on the aforestated p rinciple that the necessity and justification for a law that governs 
voluntary associations, one of which the liberty chamber is grounded upon. It is therefore held 
that provisions of the liberty chambers constitution are binding and enforceable on all mem bers 
and the activities of the liberty chambers is subject to the overriding provisions of the Law 
Students’ Society Constitution, rules and regulations of the University of Ilorin and the 
1999 Constitution Of The Federal Republic of Nigeria (2011 as amended). 
It, therefore, becomes a duty upon every member of the chambers, as backed by the law, to 
ensure that the provisions of the constitution are complied with to the letter. In light of the above, 
the provisions that are intertwined in the circumstances o f this case must be respected and 
implemented as much as the law will permit. 
The claimants in their averments, while canvassing for the enforcement of the provision of 
section 17(2) of the liberty chambers’ constitution in effect, questioned and attacked the 
justiciability of section 4 (1) of same. In other words, claimants desire to enforce 17(2) which 
mandates the chambers to occupy its office of PRO II with any of its members from 100 level, 
however, they are not interested in submitting to the precondi tions as prescribed by section 4(1) 
which clearly, effectively and exclusively preserves its membership and by extension, eligibility 

 
18 |  P a g e
 
for its membership rights conferred on members of the chambers as enunciated under section 5 
(1) to only students who have gone through the matriculation process successfully.  
Hence, claimants are demanding a right of election granted on matriculated undergraduates even 
though those 100 level members have not been matriculated as undergraduate students of the 
University of Ilorin. 
It is instructive to point out here that all the relevant provisions, in this case, are read 
conjunctively to determine the legal rights and status of members of the claimants in this case. 
Therefore the provision which reserves the office of PRO II  to 100 level members of the faculty 
of law goes thus: 
Sec 17(2): The public relation officer II shall exercise the following powers and perform 
the following functions: 
He shall assist the pro in his duties and deputise for him in his absence 
He shall perform any other duty assigned to him by the pro i 
He shall discharge all other duties that are necessary for the effective 
performance of his office in accordance with the provisions of this 
constitution. 
Provided that only a member of the chambers who would be in 100 level during his 
period of service may be appointed as PRO II. 
However, the question to be asked to identify whether a person is a 100 level member of the 
chamber? To answer this question, recourse is taken to section 4(1) of the Liberty Chamb ers 
constitution which provides: 
Section 4(1): A member shall be a matriculated undergraduate student of the faculty of law, 
University of Ilorin 
From the above express provision, it is clear that a student who has not undergone the process of 
matriculation as an undergraduate student of the faculty of law, UNILORIN cannot qualify as a 
member of the Liberty Chambers. This is in accordance with the express intentions of the Liberty 
Chambers Constitution. I hereby discountenance with the arguments of the claimants and this 
case is resolved in favour of the defendant chamber. 
Having established earlier that each association reserves the powers to regulate their own internal 
workings and lay down rules to regulate their modus operandi. In this instant case, the stipulation 
that only matriculated 100 level students are eligible for the position of PRO II cannot be 

 
19 |  P a g e
 
questioned by this court, particularly whe n that stipulation does not collide with any other law 
that has overriding force in this faculty.  At this juncture, it is apposite to underline that 
Matriculation is a stage that confirms the completeness of studentship. Before a student scales 
through the stage of matriculation successfully, his faculty or course of study might be changed 
as part of the university’s admission processes. It is the matriculation exercise that grants to each 
student his official identification number in the university, otherw ise called, matriculation 
number. In light of this, the requirement of matriculation of a student before he can be deemed 
reliable for a leadership post is important and cannot be eroded and taken lightly. 
However, I do appreciate the advocacy of the claim ants’ counsel; their effort will go a long way 
in assisting courts of this jurisdiction in laying to bed the position of our laws as to the status of 
students who are yet to be matriculated.  It is hereby further held that no law has been breached 
by the defendant chambers.  
OPINION OF HON JUDGE MUHAMMED SHUAIB JLSS 
In my consideration of this case, I will adopt the following issues formulated as they are 
satisfactory enough to dispose of the contention by the parties. 
 Whether a student who has not gone through matriculation ceremony can be a member of 
liberty chamber 
 Whether the rights of the defendants have been breached. 
On issue one, in ascertaining the true meaning of the provisions of a statute or the Constitution, 
the Constitution and the statute bein g interpreted must be read as a whole and construed so. See 
ACTION CONGRESS AC & ANOR VS INEC (2007) 12 NWLR (PART 1048) 222 at 259 . 
It is necessary to bear in mind that the liberty chambers constitution is a subsidiary legislation 
which operates side by side with the Law Students’ Society Constitution which is also 
subsidiary legislation to faculty of law students' handbook which is also subsidiary legislation to 
University of Ilorin students' information and regulations handbook. All shall be read togeth er 
in order to give effect and meaning to the rights and obligation of individuals. It is settled 
principle of interpretation that a provision of the Constitution or a statute should not be 
interpreted in isolation but rather in the context of the Constitu tion or a statute as a whole. 
Therefore, in construing the provisions of a section of a statute the whole of the statute must be 
read in order to determine the meaning and effect of the words being interpreted. See  BUHARI 
& ANOR V. OBASANJO & ORS (2005) 13 NWLR (PT.941) 1 AT 219.  

 
20 |  P a g e
 
In this regard, page 27 of faculty of law students' handbook (undergraduate) 2016 -2018 
defines university matriculation as “official acceptance of fresh students (both UTME and DE) 
to the University. Each student is required to take the matriculation oath signed by the registrar. 
Only matriculated students are bona fide students of the university”  The word matriculation is 
also defined in page 15 -16 of the University of Ilorin students' information and regulations 
handbook as swearing to the matriculation oath.  
As it is trite that “An expression used in a subsidiary instrument has the same meaning as 
in the Act conferring power to make the instrument”  I rely on section 19(1) of the 
Interpretation Act cap 192 LFN 1990.  I hereby inte rpret the word “Matriculated 
undergraduate student” in section 4(1) of liberty chamber to mean a student who has taken the 
matriculation oath signed by the registrar . I hereby resolve the first issue in favour of the 
defendant.  
On issue two, it is self -evident from the provision of section 4(1) of liberty chambers 
constitution that only a student who has been matriculated qualifies to be a member of liberty 
chamber and can enjoy the rights stated in section 5 including right to vote and be voted for. 
The evidence before this Court indicated that at the time the decision of the congress challenged 
was reached, the defendants were yet to be legal member of the liberty chamber, thus they were 
not entitled to benefit from the rights stipulated in section 5(1) o f the liberty chamber including 
right to vote and be voted for. If it is right that you cannot put something on nothing and expect 
it to stand, therefore you cannot claim a right you are not entitled to. I rely on the case of  
MACFOY V. UAC LTD (1961) 3 W.LR. (P.C) 1405 @ 1409 
My lords, permit me to say this, I need not remind the defendant's counsel that the hallmarks of 
a good brief of argument is accuracy, brevity and clarity. Briefs are meant to assist the court in 
the administration and promotion of the  course of justice. A good brief does not allow for 
verbosity and must be a succinct statement of a party's argument. A well -crafted brief makes for 
joyful reading while a badly crafted one is tedious and laborious to understand and it is like a 
bad story which leaves an audience disgruntled, disgusted and unhappy. Although it is settled 
law that no matter how bad, faulty or inelegant a brief may be, a court would not close its eyes 
to the fact of its existence and consideration of the issues raised, though  poorly, in order to 
effectively do substantial justice to the parties.  Perhaps, if cases are won only by arguments 
contained in the briefs of arguments and not on the position of the law on a particular issue or 

 
21 |  P a g e
 
subject matter in dispute, the result of th is case may have gone the other way round. Not only is 
the defendant's brief of argument replete with illogical and sometimes irrelevant arguments, but 
it was also inelegantly written with several duplications of arguments. Litigation is not a long 
essay competition where success is determined by the length of the brief of arguments and it has 
been said that repetition does not improve an argument - UWAZURIKE V. NWACHUKWU 
(2013) 3 NWLR (PT. 1342) 503 
Therefore all the issues couched herein are resolved in favour of the defendant. I grant all 
prayers and orders as granted by my learned brother in the lead judgment.  
 
APPEARANCES: 
J.O BAIYESHA with I.O. ALABI ………………..... CLAIMANTS’ COUNSELS 
ISIAKA AZEEZ …………………………………….. DEFENDANT’S COUNSEL 
W.O. TAOFIK………………………………………………………….. AMICUS 
 Q.A. ADEDIMEJI …………………………………………………….. AMICUS 
A.B. ABDULRAHEEM ………………………………………………. AMICUS 
 
LAW REPORT EDITED BY: 
1. MUHAMMED ITOPA 
2. OLADOJAH KHADEEJAH 
3. OKWARA LAWRENCE

 
22 |  P a g e
 
 