IN THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN HOLDEN AT UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN ON MONDAY, 24TH MARCH, 2025. SUIT “ NO: SUC/UIL/OJ/004/24-25 CITATION N0: (2025) 12 USLR
BEFORE THEIR LORDSHIPS
TOHEEB ABDULSAMOD OBASANJO JUSTICE OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT
AIWINNILOMO FATIMAH ADUKE JUSTICE OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT
SIDEEQ ZAKARIYAH JUSTICE OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT
OYEGBAMI BLESSED ANUOLUWPO...................................CLAIMANT AND
1. PRESIDENT OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION BAR
2. STUDENTS’ UNION BAR ASSOCIATION
UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN...................................................DEFENDANTS
RATIO DECIDENDI
1. The court distinguished between a “dispute” and a “claim,” stating that a dispute requires a disagreement or controversy between parties, whereas a claim is a demand or assertion of a right, and this claim can come without controversy as to it’s existence. See also Total Nigeria Plc v. National Oil & Chemical Marketing Plc & Anor., Nigerian Agip Oil Company Ltd. V. Famfa Oil Ltd. (2003) 13 NWLR (Pt. 838) 407, Shell Petroleum Development Company of Nigeria Ltd. V. Mr. Olarewaju & Ors. (2006) 18 NWLR (Pt. 1011) 1, Chevron Nigeria Ltd. V. Nwuche & Ors. (2007) 19 NWLR (Pt. 1066) 247.
2. On whether or not the document presented by the defendant is a computer generated evidence. It should be noted that by the provision of section 84 of the Evidence Act which expressly provide for the admissibility or otherwise of computer generated evidence. It state a statement of document produce by a computer would be admissible if it is shown to compile with the law. Section 258 of the Evidence Act while defining a computer what computer is a device that process information to give out meaningful result from calculation etc. However, the same section define document to include any matters or by more than one of these means intended to be used for the purpose of recording that matter. Paragraph C of section 258 also
95
defining document as any film, negative, tape or other device in which one or more visual images are embodied so as to the capable of with or other witness to be reproduce from it.
APPLICATION, In applying section 84, section 258(a)(c) of the Evidence Act, it is clear beyond all reasonable doubt that the document which emboded the advocate of the week is nothing but a graphics born out from an intellectual work of a person even though printed by computer does not remove the intellectual property where is to be acknowledged by the owner of the court. The printed document of advocate of the week is a combination of drawings, map, graphs and photography which are part of the definition of a document. Conclusively, this court hereby holds and ruled that the document which emboded the advocate is no way a computer generated document but an ordinary document born out of an intellectual work of a person and on this note the court hereby admit the graphics of the week as exhibit and document and mark Exhibit D1.
NOTABLE HOLDINGS
1. ON THE ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION CLAUSE IN THE STUDENT UNION BAR CONSTITUTION
The provision of Order 10 of the Students’ Union Bar Association is only applicable in a situation where the subject matter is a dispute and not a claim of right -. PER TOHEEB ABDULSAMOD OBASANJO, JSU
2. ON A CLAIMANT BEING PART OF THE CLAIMANT COUNSELS
A lawyer testifying her in his own case as witness has been discouraged in petoral of cases such as IBRAHIM V STATE (2016) 18 NWLR (pt.1544) 166 the court emphasized the importance of distinguishing roles to avoid conflict of interest. IN FAWEHINMI V NBA (NO.1) 1989 2 NWLR (pt 105) 494, the Supreme court hold on appearance of legal practitioners as litigant that “a Litigant who is a legal practitioner conduct his case as a litigant not as a legal practitioner representing himself.... He must elect to argue in person or not, there cannot be a mixture of the two”- PER AIWINNILOMO FATIMAH,JSU
COURT RECORDS
The presiding justices held that service is basically the job of the court, the court is to ensure each party is served not either party. The court ordered that the preliminary obligation should be served to the claimant so as to pursue the process.
The defendant raised another objection that the appearance of the lead counsel as a lawyer cannot represent himself if he is a witness. Claimant counsel, section 36 CFRN, everyone has the right to legal practitioner and being the claimant, the rule is not applicable in this instance.
GARAN V OLOMU (2013) 11 NWLR PT 1366 @ 227. The Students’ union court ruled on the improprietory of counsel appearing as both a counsel and witness in a case. It was ruled that it is contrary to the practice of trial court and fundamental Irregularity for counsel to appear as both counsel and a witness in the same case particularly where the evidence he will give us so material that it forms the basis of the decision of the trial court in that matter. In
96

this instance case, the counsel is the claimant and his evidence will bring a material fact and it is a fundamental Irregularity for counsel to be a witness, the defendant submitted.
It is a matter of bad practice for a counsel to be a counsel and witness, it does not affect his testimony. In SODIPO V LENNIN KAINEM (1936) 1 NWLR PT 15 @ 220, It was held that although it is not desirable, it’s not illegal since no law prohibit same if counsel is conversant with the fact or where the fact are within his personal knowledge. In AKINLADE V INEC (2020) IT NWLR PT 1754 @ 439, NWITE V PDP (2023) 7 NWLR PT 1883 @ 357. It is a matter of rules of professional conduct and not affect the testimony.
P.O OYEBANJI (SAU) raised the applicability of the rule of professional conduct in our jurisdiction aspect of a lawyer or non-lawyer to represent himself in court and lawyer been a witness. H sated that the rule of professional conduct cannot bind student legal practitioners has it cannot bound them in totality. He stated further than when a client us appearing for himself or another person it is bank in section 36(4) CFRN, DARAMOLA V NIGERIA POLICE CID IDMUI POLICE DIVISION AND ORS ‘(2019) LPLLR 46593 CA. The court held that a person being a lawyer or non-lawyer can represent himself in court. A counsel can be a witness if it as technicalities and not substantial matters and everyone is a competent witness. IBRAHIM V STATE (2016) 18 NWLR PT 16 44 166, the court clarified and emphasised the important of distinguishing roles to avoid conflict in lawsuit. UZODINMA V IZUNOSO (2011) 17 NWLR PT 1275 @ 30. The court opined that a counsel testimony in a case which he is conducting can create bias in the mind of the court and the court cautioned itself against such except for the purpose of justice. ADELEKE V STATE (1991) 2 NWLR PT 1527 @, 157, it is the of the court that a counsel should exclude himself if he will testify.
Counsel to the claimant while relying on OKORONKWO V LAWDEE INT. NIG LTD CA said The desirability or otherwise of a counsel giving evidence on behalf of his client is quite different from the competence of the counsel to give evidence on behalf of his client. The court also held that there is nothing in the provision of R 19 which suggest that the piece of evidence from a competent counsel or witness must be esponge from record of the court. AKINYEMI V AKINYEMI AND ORS, the court ruled that a counsel role as a witness should not be discouraged but carefully considered and not be used to undermine integrity of the legal process.
The defendant counsel raised that the electronic evidence complied with the Evidence Act.” According to section 84 of the Evidence Act, I hereby take the court to the already adopted document and certificate of compliance”. The claimant counsel said the court mention that the certificate of compliance is not with the court. The claimant counsel further tender the certificate of compliance with electronic generated document before the court. The court hereby adopted the WhatsApp conservation and certificate of complaince marker exhibit C 2.
THE DEFENDANT OPENS HIS DEFENSE
The defendant counsel mentioned that to determine whether the intended exhibit is.a computer generated evidence, the counsel referred the court to section 84(5)(c) of the Evidence Act, the graphics before this court is indeed a computer generated evidence.
97

However the provision of section 58 of the Evidence Act in definition of document. In view of this, the filer is not a computer generated evidence but a document . The contention is the graphics is not an electronic generated evidence but a documentary evidence and it is presented as a photograph in section,258 of the Evidence Act and submit that the filer is not an electronic generated evidence.
The claimant counsel seeks that the defendant has foremost admitted that the document is a computer generated evidence.
On whether or not the document presented by the defendant is a computer generated evidence. It should be noted that by the provision of section 84 of the Evidence Act which expressly provide for the admissibility or otherwise of computer generated evidence. It state a statement of document produce by a computer would be admissible if it is shown to compile with the law. Section 258 of the Evidence Act while defining a computer what computer is a device that process information to give out meaningful result from calculation etc. However, the same section define document to include any matters or by more than one of these means intended to be used for the purpose of recording that matter. Paragraph C of section 258 also defining document as any film, negative, tape or other device in which one or more visual images are embodied so as to the capable of with or other witness to be reproduce from it.
APPLICATION, In applying section 84, section 258(a)(c) of the Evidence Act, it is clear beyond all reasonable doubt that the document which emboded the advocate of the week is nothing but a graphics born out from an intellectual work of a person even though printed by computer does not remove the intellectual property where is to be acknowledged by the owner of the court. The printed document of advocate of the week is a combination of drawings, map, graphs and photography which are part of the definition of a document. Conclusively, this court hereby holds and ruled that the document which emboded the advocate is no way a computer generated document but an ordinary document born out of an intellectual work of a person and on this note the court hereby admit the graphics of the week as exhibit and document and mark Exhibit D1.
MUHAMMAD V HUSSEINI (1998) 14 NWLR PT 584 @ 108, where the court gives a ruling on funtu officio means a task and the court cannot make a decision on a decision twice. It is to be noted that provision of chapter 4 which gives fundamental right of a person to represent himself or by a legal practitioner, R 14 and 15 of RPC also saying a legal practitioner can represent himself or be a witness if there is no clash of interest. Therefore, the ruling that a claminat cannot be a counsel is fun to officio and in this court held that the claminat cannot act as a witness in this instant case again.
ISSUES RAISED SUO MOTU
This honorable court raised two issues for the determination of this matter.
Issue 1: Whether given the circumstances of this case it is applicable to refer the case to the dispute resolution committee.
Issue 2: Whether or not this honorable court has the requisite jurisdiction to entertain and determine this case.
98

RULING ON THE PRELIMINARY OBJECTION
ISSUE 1:
WHETHER HAVING REGARD TO THE PROCESS BEFORE THE COURT, IT IS APPLICABLE TO REFER THE CASE TO THE DISPUTE RESOLUTION COMMITTEE
My Lords, Dispute as defined by the Black’s Law Dictionary as “A conflict or controversy; a conflict of claims or rights; an assertion of a right, claim, or demand on one side, met by contrary claims or allegations on the other.
SLAVEN V. WHEELER, 58 TEX. 25 ; KEITH V. LEVI (C. C.) 2 FED. 745; FT. PITT GAS CO. V.BOROUGH OF SEWICKLEY, 198 PA. 201, 47 ATL. 957; RAILROAD CO. V. CLARK, 92 FED. 968, 35 C. C. A. 120.
The black's Law Dictionary also defined claim as A legal assertion; a legal demand; Taken by a person wanting compensation, payment, or reimbursement for a loss under a contract, or an injury due to negligence.
The court of appeal In JULIUS BERGER (NIG.) PLC V. TOKI RAINBOW COMMUNITY BANK LTD. (2006) 12 NWLR (PT. 995) 476 gave a distinct distinction between a dispute and claim. The court went further holding that it is only when there is a dispute between parties that the Dispute Resolution Committee can have jurisdiction to entertain a matter however when there is a claim or a right has been trampled upon the parties are meant to approach the court of law as provided for under the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria (1999) as altered.
Section 46. (1) “Any person who alleges that any of the provisions of this Chapter has been, is being or likely to be contravened in any State in relation to him may apply to a High Court in that State for redress.”
The Appeal Court in JULIUS BERGER (NIG.) PLC V. TOKI RAINBOW COMMUNITY BANK LTD. (2006) 12 NWLR (PT. 995) 476 held that a dispute must exist before a matter can be referred to arbitration or a dispute resolution committee. The court emphasized that a breach of contract, in itself, does not constitute a dispute.
In A.G BENDEL STATE v. A.G FEDERATION & ORS (1981) LPELR-605(SC) 1981 S.C... the supreme court adopted The Oxford Universal Dictionary which defines dispute as “the act of arguing against, controversy, debate, contention as to rights, claims and the like or on a matter of opinion".
My Lords, also in the popular case of AIR VIA LTD v. ORIENTAL AIRLINES LTD (2004) LPELR-272(SC) 2004 S.C. The court held: “On what constitutes a dispute, the Black’s Law Dictionary, 6th Edition defines it as “A conflict or controversy; a conflict of claims of rights, or demand on one side met by contrary claims or allegations on the other.
It is a very settled position law that before a matter can be referred to a dispute resolution committee there must be a dispute to be resolved.
This principle has further been reaffirmed by the court of appel in Julius Berger (Nig.) Plc v. Toki Rainbow Community Bank Ltd. (2006) 12 NWLR (Pt. 995) 476.
99

In this case, the Court of Appeal held that a dispute must exist before a matter can be referred to arbitration or a dispute resolution committee. The court emphasized that a breach of contract, in itself, does not constitute a dispute.
The court distinguished between a “dispute” and a “claim,” stating that a dispute requires a disagreement or controversy between parties, whereas a claim is a demand or assertion of a right, and this claim can come without controversy as to it’s existence. See also TOTAL NIGERIA PLC V. NATIONAL OIL & CHEMICAL MARKETING PLC & ANOR., NIGERIAN AGIP OIL COMPANY LTD. V. FAMFA OIL LTD. (2003) 13 NWLR (PT. 838) 407, SHELL PETROLEUM DEVELOPMENT COMPANY OF NIGERIA LTD. V. MR. OLAREWAJU & ORS. (2006) 18 NWLR (PT. 1011) 1, CHEVRON NIGERIA LTD. V. NWUCHE & ORS. (2007) 19 NWLR (PT. 1066) 247,
This is the reasoning of the supreme courts in SEMBCORP ENGINEERING LTD VS IPCO (WA) 2024 17 NWLR (PT 1968) 531 HOLDINGS LTD where the court held that
“arbitration is an alternative means of dispute resolution and there is no basis for invoking an arbitration clause where there is no dispute. There is no dispute within the meaning of an agreement to refer parties to arbitration where a party admits its liability but is merely refusing to pay. [K.S.U.D.B. v. Fanz Const. Co. Ltd. (1990) 4 NWLR (Pt. 142) 1 referred to.] (P. 569, paras. E-G)”
Although, the provision of Order 10 which states that;
“No aggrieved member shall resort to the court unless his/her complaint must have been considered and disposed off by the Dispute Resolution Committee...”. It should be noted that the Dispute Resolution Committee has power and authority to listen to disputes which may arise between individuals or the association and individual(s).
However as stated above the issue before this honorable court is that of a claim and the provision of the constitution particularly section 46 as stated above gave individual’s right to approach the court immediately their right has been breached.
My Lords, the provision of the constitution particularly section 1(3) states verbatim that ;
“(3) If any other law is inconsistent with the provisions of this Constitution, this Constitution shall prevail, and that other law shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void.”
In view of this, the honorable court rule that given the circumstance of this case it is not a necessity for the claimant to approach the dispute resolution committee before approaching the court.
Issue 2: On whether or not this honorable court has the requisite jurisdiction to entertain and determine this case.
It should be of noe that even though the provision of Order 10 of the Constitution of the Student Union Bar Association is a condition precedent for those with dispute and which this honorable court do not disagree with as held by My Lord, Justice T. A. Jamiu JSC( as he then was) in the case of Okwara Lawrence v Student Union Bar Association (2023) 3 USLR pg 39, where my Lord states verbatim that; “If a condition precedent is not complied with, the action
100

is incompetent and the court shall thereby be divested of jurisdiction. As such, since the Bar constitution is a Constitution of the Bar and it makes approaching the Dispute resolution committee a condition precedent before bringing any action to the court..."
The above Is a conditional precedent which must be complied with before approaching the court can have jurisdiction to entertain and determine a matter before it.
The court In the locus classicus case of Madukolu v Nkemdilim (1962) 2 ALL NLR 581 held that jurisdiction is the life wire of a matter without which a case can exist. It is also the power of the court to hear and determine a case.
The court listed 4 conditions to be considered by the court before hearing and determining a matter before it. They include;
(a) The court is properly constituted as regards number and qualification of the members of the bench;
(b)The subject matter of the action is within the jurisdiction of the court; and ©The case before the court is initiated by due process of law, or
(d) that the condition precedent to the exercise of jurisdiction is complied with.
However, it must be noted that the provision of Order 10 of the Constitution of the Students’ Union Bar Association is applicable in a situation where there is a dispute among members of the association or the association and a member (s) as stated in issue 1.
This is a claim and which is quite distinct from dispute.
RULING ON THE CLAIMANT PRELIMINARY OBJECTION
On the objection raised by the defendand that the claimant who is also a claimant counsel violated R 20 of the Rules of professional conduct.
An issue has couched for the explanation of this objection which is “whether or not a claimant can be a claimant counsel?”
R20 of the Rules of professional conduct provided that “subject to sub rule (2) of this rule, a lawyer shall not accept to act in any contemplated or pending litigation if he knows or ought reasonably to know that he or a lawyer in his firm may be called or ought to be called as a witness”.
It is evident judging by the adopted originating Summon that B.O oyegbami a counsel to the clamant will be a witness to prove the claimant’s claim.
But, does this negate the constitutional provision of S36(6)(C) which stated that “... defendant himself in person or by legal practitioner of his own choice.”
The claimant who is also the claimant counsel of his own choice decided to represent himself. However, a lawyer testifying her in his own case as witness has been discouraged in petoral of cases such as IBRAHIM V STATE (2016) 18 NWLR (pt.1544) 166 the court emphasized the importance of distinguishing roles to avoid conflict of interest.
101

In this instant, the claimant claims he is the claimant who is a student legal practitioner and wants to defend himself as a counsel alongside a Other Counsels,
The ruling of this court on whether a claimant can be a claimant counsel shall be based on the following cases:
IN REGD.TRUSTEES, ECWA CHURCH V IJESHA (1999) 13 NWLR (Pt. 635)368 CA
“on Litigant’s right to choice of counsel- A person is entitled to defend himself or present case either in person or by a counsel of his choice”
In UKWENI V GOV.C.R.S (2008) 3 NWLR (Pt 1073) 33 (CA), the court held that “...He can exercise the right to counsel of his choice by conducting his Case himself”.
In UKEWENI V GOV. C.R.S (supra), the court on the scope of right of legal practitioner to conduct. Case in person hold that:
“A litigant who happens to be a legal practitioner, if he elects to conduct in person a case to which he is a party, conduct such case as a litigant and not as a legal practitioner representing himself, the litigant. In other words, a party to a proceeding who is also a legal practitioner in law properly appear but in person and as counsel representing himself. He must elect to argue his case in person or through counsel of his choice as he cannot in law represent himself even if he is a qualified legal practitioner. There cannot be mixture of his character as a litigant on the one part and a legal practitioner on the other part, even though the legal training he has may be rightly utilized for his own benefit while conducting his case in person”.
Also in AUDU V GIDEON(2015) 12 NWLR Pt(1474) @495 CA the court held that “A litigant who is also a legal practitioner conducts his case as litigant not as a legal practitioner representing himself, the litigant. Thus, a person cannot appear both as a person and as a counsel for himself... however, a litigant who is a legal practitioner like other litigant has the right like other litigant to engage the service of legal practitioner to represent himself”.
IN FAWEHINMI V NBA (NO.1) 1989 2 NWLR (pt 105) 494, the Supreme court hold on appearance of legal practitioners as litigant that “a Litigant who is a legal practitioner conduct his case as a litigant not as a legal practitioner representing himself.... He must elect to argue in person or not, there cannot be a mixture of the two”.
Therefore, the appearance of B. A Oyegbami the claimant as the claimant’s counsel is hereby stuck out as he cannot be a litigant representing himself as a legal practitioner.
The entirety of the case was struck out due to statute barred. APPEARANCES:
CLAIMANT
B.A OYEGBAMI
B.A BALOGUN O.M ABIKAN
102

DEFENDANT
F.A ADEBAYO M.A AJENIFUJA AMICUS CURAIS O.D FATOYE
P.O OYEBANJI
