IN THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT HOLDEN AT UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN
(2025) SUC/UIL/JC/OJ/015/24-25
ON TUESDAY, THE 27TH DAY OF MAY, 2025 CITATION: (2025) 7 USLR
BEFORE THEIR LORDSHIPS:
ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE, C.J.S.U. – PRESIDING
MUHAMMAD KAMALDEEN GBEMISOLA, J.S.U.
ASHIMI SAOBAN ADEDAYO, J.S.U.
BETWEEN
1. SEN. OLAJIDE ISLAMIYAT OLAJUMOKE
2. SEN. AKEWUSHOLA RODIAT MOROUNKUNBI
3. SEN. OLOJEDE JOSEPH OLUWATOBILOBA..............................CLAIMANTS
AND
1. HUSSEIN-OLOTO, BILAL, PRESIDENT OF PHARMACEUTICAL ASSOCIATION OF NIGERIA (PAN)
2. AGBABIAKA FATIHAT OMOTAYO, PUBLIC RELATION OFFICER OF PAN ................................................................................................DEFENDANTS
SUMMARY OF FACTS:
The Claimants, elected Senators representing the Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences in the University of Ilorin Students’ Union Senate Council, instituted an action against the President and Public Relations Officer (PRO) of the Pharmaceutical Association of Nigerian Students (PANS), University of Ilorin chapter.
The grievance stemmed from multiple instances where the Defendants allegedly restricted and deleted the Claimants’ attempts to communicate with students via the faculty’s official WhatsApp platform. Particularly, the Claimants stated they were acting in response to urgent accommodation issues raised by students residing in Atlantic Heights and Moremi Hostels. The Sub-Dean of the Faculty had requested a list of affected students, prompting the 2nd Claimant to post a call for submissions on the group. The message was deleted by the Defendants who insisted that all communications must pass through them.
The Claimants argued that this restriction infringed on their constitutional role as student representatives and hindered their duties. They filed the suit by Originating Summons, supported by affidavits and written addresses. The Defendants filed two preliminary objections, challenging
55
the jurisdiction of the Court and its competence to entertain claims bordering on fundamental rights.
RATIO DECIDENDI:
Court - JURISDICTION OF COURT – The Court's jurisdiction on fundamental human rights: the court has the jurisdiction to hear and determine all the issues raised by the Claimants for the just determination of this case excluding the issue on fundamental human right which is to the exclusion of the high court of a state as provided under Section 46(1) of Constitution of Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999 As Amended and the case of Denton-West v. Jack (2013) 15 NWLR (Pt. 1377) 205.
Procedure — AMENDMENT OF ORIGINATING PROCESS — Per the decision of the Supreme Court decision in AIC Ltd v Technip(2023) 4 NWLR (Pt.1875) 537, it is trite law that “The essence of amendment of court process should be to place before the court all the relevant, material and crucial issues of disputes between the parties submitted to the court for divisive and effective resolution in order to do substantial justice in the case.” Hence, this court refused the application of the Claimants through their motion on notice to amend their originating process as the supposed amendment does not in any way place any crucial issue (s) before this honourable court.
Rule of Law — CONSTITUTIONAL SUPREMACY— Section 1(d) of the Students’ Union Constitution 2024 (As Revised) provides that; “the constitution shall be supreme and the supremacy of this constitution shall be binding on all members of the Union; furthermore, if other laws, rules or regulations are inconsistent with the provision of this constitution, this constitution shall prevail and such other laws, rules and regulations shall be null and void”. Although, Article 1 Section 4 of the PHARMACEUTICAL ASSOCIATION OF NIGERIAN STUDENTS UNILORIN CONSTITUTION 2023 established the supremacy of the PANS Constitution, all faculty constitutions including PANS Constitution, fall under the ambit of “other laws” in the provision of Section 1(d) of the Students’ Union Constitution as it is supreme over all faculty enactments.
Rule of Law – Conventions Are Not Law: Practices handed down by previous administrations without constitutional backing are conventions and cannot override expressly granted constitutional duties. (A.-G., Ondo State v. A.-G., Ekiti State (2001) 17 NWLR (Pt. 743) 706).
Rule of Law —Representative Rights: Elected senators are independent actors with constitutional mandates and cannot be subordinated to executive officers of associations without express legal provision.
NOTABLE HOLDINGS AND PRONOUNCEMENTS:
INTERPRETATION–WHO IS A REPRESENTATIVE
Representatives according to the Black's law dictionary 10th edition page 1494 as “someone who acts for or on behalf of another ". Accordingly, it implies that a representative may be someone who acts to protect the interest of another person at a designated place. Per Kamaldeen Gbemisola JSU
PROCEDURE—USE OF THE WORD ‘THAT’ IN AFFIDAVITS: 56

Borrowing the dictum of my noble Lord Niki Tobi JSC (as he then was) in the case of Eze v. Okolonji (1997) 7 NWLR (Pt. 513) 515 on the insignificance of using "that" in commencing new paragraph in affidavit, it was posited that it is a style which has hardened into a tradition for a paragraph in an affidavit to commence with the now overburdened word of "that". No affidavit is regarded as good without that word. Because of the regular use of the word, an affidavit without it looks "naked", having not on it the required "clothing". Per Ashimi Saoban, JSU, in the case of ADEDEJI FAVOUR ADEYINKA v THE DIRECTOR OF INFORMATION OF THE STUDENTS' UNION BAR ASSOCIATION & ANOR with suit number SUC/UIL/JC/OJ/003/24-25, it is an unnecessary determiner which requires no further repetition. Per Ashimi Saoban Adedayo JSU
ON THE PRELIMINARY ISSUES:
This honorable court resolved the first issue in favor of the defendants while the second issue favored the Claimants and this honourable court ruled that it has jurisdiction to hear and determine all the issues raised by the Claimants for the just determination of this case excluding the issue on fundamental human right which is to the exclusion of the high court of a state as provided under Section 46(1) of Constitution of Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999 As Amended and the case of Denton-West v. Jack (2013) 15 NWLR (Pt. 1377) 205. The Claimants proceeded to adopt a motion on notice for the amendment of their originating process to include a prayer to the initial one.
This honorable court couched an issue suomoto that;
1. Whether or not in the circumstances of this case and in the interest of justice, the Claimants’ motion on notice to amend their originating process should be adopted and granted before this honourable court?
This honorable court ordered counsel to both parties to argue on the issue and this court ruled while placing heavy reliance on the Supreme Court decision in AIC Ltd v Technip (2023)4 NWLR (Pt.1875)537 that “The essence of amendment of court process should be to place before the court all the relevant, material and crucial issues of disputes between the parties submitted to the court for divisive and effective resolution in order to do substantial justice in the case”
Hence, this court refused the application of the Claimants through their motion on notice to amend their originating process as the supposed amendment does not in any way place any crucial issue (s) before this honourable court
ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE, (CJSU) DELIVERING THE LEAD JUDGEMENT
In the instant suit, the claimants argued and established via their respective affidavits that the defendants have been hampering them from carrying out their duties one of which is securing the accommodation of the students which is under the responsibility of the Senate Council.
In response to this, the defendants while arguing that the defendants have the constitutional duties to protect the interest of members of the association, relied on Article 9 Section 2, Paragraph (g) PANS Constitution and Article 9 section 2 Paragraph (j) of the PANS Constitution which states that one of the functions of the CEC is to ensure that all resolutions of the
 57

association and the constitutional provisions are complied with. No doubt, the supremacy of the Constitution is well grounded and articulated under the Association’s Constitution. Article 1 Section 4 of the PHARMACEUTICAL ASSOCIATION OF NIGERIAN STUDENTS UNILORIN CONSTITUTION 2023 (hereinafter referred to as PANS Constitution) provides thus:
“This constitution is supreme to any other constitution of any group(s) of pharmacy students of the faculty and shall be binding on all registered students of the faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Ilorin, after the adoption by the congress. It is the strongest legal instrument of the Association and shall prevail in case of any constitution(s) of constituent club(s), society(ies) or association(s) which is inconsistent with the provisions of this constitution”
By Article 9 Section 2, Paragraph (g) PANS Constitution provides to the effect that;
“The Central Executive Council shall be official representatives of the Associations’ interest with the faculty and university and shall protect the image of her students in accordance with this constitution”.
This is supported by the first defendants’ averments in his affidavit similar to that of the Second defendant. It is important to reproduce the averments;
“5. The Faculty of Pharmaceutical sciences has an official WhatsApp Platform where important messages are disseminated across members of the Faculty.
6. To prevent Spamming or posting of irrelevant messages on this official platform, there are some laid down rules which are in place which have been passed down from one Administration to another.
7. One of such rules include that any message to be sent to the Faculty of the Association by any member should pass through the Public relations officer of the Association or the President.
8. This rule is to maintain orderliness in the Group Chat and to prevent posting of irrelevant messages on the platform and putting forward the interest of the members of the Association.
9. In a situation where this rule isn’t abided by, any message shall be deleted as a penalty for non-compliance.
10. The first Claimant has however failed to comply with this rule which led to her message been deleted.
11. I have sworn to uphold the constitution and ensure that all resolutions of the Association and constitutional provisions are complied with.
13. My actions are only in the best interest of the Association and ensuring compliance with the resolved rules of the Association”.
The averments of the claimants, especially some specific paragraphs of the Second Claimant’s activities raised the doubt to the mind as to whether the defendants are acting according to law and in the interests of students of faculty of pharmacy. The specific paragraphs of the second Claimants’ affidavit are as follows;
“7. That the President of faculty of pharmaceutical sciences and the PRO have been frustrating the realization of my responsibility as a senator.
58

8. That some students of the faculty of pharmaceutical sciences have accommodation issues at Atlantic height and Moremi hostels.
9. That the call was made to the senators and I approached the sub dean of the faculty of pharmaceutical sciences 10. That the sub-dean required that I provide him with the list of the affected students.
11. That I sent a notice to the group requesting for the said list
12. That the defendants deleted the notice. The evidence of same is hereby pleaded.
13. That the first defendant held ground that every message must come through the second defendant.
14. That the defendants have been hampering communications from the stable of the senators to the members of faculty of pharmaceutical sciences.
15. That the defendants kept deleting messages coming from the stable of the senators faculty of pharmaceutical sciences. The evidence of same is hereby pleaded.
16. That the first defendant required that every program of the senators must come through him.”
Evidence referred to in paragraph 12 and 15 were never pleaded, other averments of the affidavits point to the fact that the responsibilities and plans of the Claimants as the senators representing the students of faculty of pharmacy in the Senate Council of the Students’ University of Ilorin and this was never denied by the defendants as they argued in their affidavits that they acting based on the conventions laid down by past administration for the overall interest of the students of faculty of pharmacy. In resolving the issue couched by this court for the just determination of this matter before it, the relevant provisions of Students’ Union Constitution 2024 As Revised and the PANS Constitution are very important. By Section 1(d) of the Students’ Union Constitution 2024 As Revised, it provides that; “the constitution shall be supreme and the supremacy of this constitution shall be binding on all members of the Union; furthermore, if other laws, rules or regulations are inconsistent with the provision of this constitution, this constitution shall prevail and such other laws, rules and regulations shall be null and void”. Although, Article 1 Section 4 of the PHARMACEUTICAL ASSOCIATION OF NIGERIAN STUDENTS UNILORIN CONSTITUTION 2023 established the supremacy of PANS Constitution, all faculty constitutions including PANS Constitution, fall under the ambit of “other laws” in the provision of Section 1(d) of the Students’ Union Constitution as it is supreme over all faculty enactments. By Section 2(e ) of the Students’ Union Constitution 2024 As Revised, it provides that-‘”the aims and objectives of the Union shall be:
(e ) to provide a forum for the freedom of thoughts, expression, actions and association”.
The 1st, 2nd and 3rd claimants being senators of the union representing the students of faculty of pharmacy in the Senate Council under the provision of Section 11(a) of the Students’ Union Constitution have the mandate to carry out plans to the students of pharmacy since they are their elected representatives at the Senate Council.
Taking a careful perusal of PANS Constitution particularly in respect to the functions of the 1 st and 2nd Defendants, there is no where that is expressly stated that activities, plans, programmes of the Claimants must be approved by the first defendant nor does the PANS Constitution state explicitly that all posts must pass through the public relations officer of PANS before they can be
59

shared to faculty groups. Although, the defendants in their affidavits averred that their acts were in line with the conventions laid down by Section 2(e ) of the Students’ Union Constitution 2024 As Revised, it provides that-‘”the aims and objectives of the Union shall be: (e ) to provide forum for the freedom of thoughts, expression, actions and association”. The 1st, 2nd and 3rd claimants being senators of the union representing the students of faculty of pharmacy in the Senate Council under the provision of Section 11(a) of the Students’ Union Constitution have the mandate to carry out plans to the students of pharmacy since they are their elected representatives at the Senate Council. Taking a careful perusal of PANS Constitution particularly in respect to the functions of the 1 st and 2nd Defendants, there is no where that is expressly stated that activities, plans, programmes of the Claimants must be approved by the first defendant nor does the PANS Constitution state explicitly that all posts must pass through the public relations officer of PANS before they can be shared to faculty groups. Although, the defendants in their affidavits averred that their acts were in line with the conventions laid down by past administrations but conventions are not laws.
In A.-G., Ondo State v. A.-G., Ekiti State (2001) 17 NWLR (Pt. 743) 706, the Supreme Court posited that the court will not hold an act to be inconsistent with the Constitution where there is no provision of the Constitution relating to the matter whatsoever, expressly or by necessary implication. Therefore, since direct posting on the faculty group by the Claimants is no where prohibited in the PANS Constitution, the defendants do not have the constitutional right to delete same. Even where prohibition of direct posting particularly by elected representatives of the Students of the faculty at various levels, is subsequently included in the PANS Constitution, it will go against the provision of Section 2(e ) of the Students’ Union Constitution 2024 As Revised and the blue pencil rule becomes applicable in the light of Section 1(d) of the Students’ Union Constitution 2024 As Revised. This is also held In Oluwabukola v. A.-G., Lagos State (2022) 2 NWLR (Pt. 1815) 499 that “A subordinate law cannot alter the superior law by making that which is made unlawful in the latter law lawful or unlawful which is made lawful”.
This honorable court is not unaware that the likelihood rationale for the actions of past administrators of PANS University of Ilorin Chapter even to a reasonable man could include the need to prevent the abuse of irrelevant posts on the faculty groups that may not be in the best interest of the Students of Faculty of Pharmacy. However, the claimants are not ordinary or mere students of the faculty of pharmacy. They are elected representatives of the Students just as the 1st and 2nd defendants. They are not senators of the faculty of pharmacy rather, they are senators of the union representing the students of the faculty of pharmacy. The claimants are working for the union in the senator council for the interest of pharmacy students and they are not subject to the defendants whatsoever before they carry out their mandate as long as the permission of the university stakeholders on Students’ matters and that of the faculty depending on the nature of the mandate, have been gotten, for the overall objectives of the Students’ Union Constitution which they have sworn to preserve. Therefore, this honorable court resolves the sole issue in favor of the Claimants and grant the following prayers;
1. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONORABLE COURT that the defendants does not have the power to restrict communications by the Claimants on the faculty group
2. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONORABLE COURT that the claimants can carry out programs without the permission of the defendants.
60

3. AN ORDER OF THIS HONORABLE COURT restraining the defendants or their agents from further restricting the claimants from communicating on the faculty group.
4. AN ORDER OF THIS HONORABLE COURT prohibiting the defendants and any student whatsoever of faculty of pharmacy from hampering the realization of the plans, programs and project of the senators representing faculty of pharmacy as approved by the University and Faculty staff management.
5. AN ORDER OF THIS HONORABLE COURT that the defendants jointly pay the sum of #9,560.00 (Nine thousand, five hundred and sixty naira only) for the distress caused to the claimants.
6. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the defendants jointly pay the sum of #3,725.00 (Three thousand, seven hundred and twenty-five naira only) as litigation cost.
CONCURRENT JUDGEMENT OF HONOURABLE JUSTICE MUHAMMAD
KAMALDEEN GBEMISOLA, JSU
After carefully and meticulously perusing the opinion of my learned brother ,Ismail Khadijah Moromoke, CJSU ,I must say they are well worded and succinctly resonates with my opinion .I must at this point add my cents to this court's pronouncements. This court is a court of justice and a court of law ,and every judgement or pronouncements of the court must resonate with these principles. The claimants before this court are senators of the Students' Union representing the Students' of pharmacy in line with the provision of *Section 11 a of the Students' union constitution* which provides as follows :
“The SC shall be composed of elected representative of halls of residence, three (3) representatives of faculties with at least a female and at least an male and co-opted member as provided for in this constitution”
Now, representatives according to the *Black's law dictionary 10th edition page 1494* as “someone who acts for or on behalf of another ". Accordingly, it implies that a representative may be someone who acts to protect the interest of another person at a designated place . To the issue raised, I think it is important to establish that the claims of the defendants are that they have acted purposely to protect the interest of the students of pharmacy.As claimed by the claimant in this suit ,the issue claimed by the claimant to have been deleted is related to accommodation. My lords, permit me to quote the relevant paragraphs of the claimants affidavit which forms evidence before this court as held in the case of H.S. Engr. Ltd. v. S.A. Yakubu (Nig.) Ltd. (2009) 10 NWLR (Pt. 1149) 416. “An affidavit evidence constitutes evidence and any deposition therein not challenged is deemed admitted. [Ajomale v. Yaduat (No. 1) (1991) 5 NWLR(Pt. 191) 257; Magnusson v. Koiki (1993) 9 NWLR(Pt. 317) 287 referred to.] (P. 429, paras. A-” Paragraph 8- 12 contains the following depositions :
8. That some students of the faculty of pharmaceutical sciences have accommodation issues at Atlantic height and Moremi hostels.
9. That the call was made to the senators and I approached the sub dean of the faculty of pharmaceutical sciences
10. That the sub dean required that I provide him with the list of the affected students
  61

11. That I sent a notice to the group requesting for the said list
12. That the defendants deleted the notice. The evidence of the same is hereby pleaded. Particularly 8 ,9,12.
The facts deposed in this affidavit was not controverted and as such deemed unchallenged. The question that begs for answer now is whether matters of accommodation in hostels do not constitute matters of interest to the students of PANS as contained in Article 9 Section 2, Paragraph (g) PANS Constitution provides to the effect that;
“The Central Executive Council shall be official representatives of the Associations’ interest with the faculty and university and shall protect the image of her students in accordance with this constitution”
It sounds antithetical that the defendant averred in their affidavit that:
5. Faculty of pharmaceutical sciences has an official WhatsApp Platform where important messages are disseminated across members of the Faculty.
6. To prevent Spamming or posting of irrelevant messages on this official platform, there are some laid down rules which are in place which are been passed down from one Administration to another .
7. One of such rules include that any message to be sent to the Faculty of the Association by any member should pass through the Public relations officer of the Association or the President.
Again , the senators of the students are officers of the senate council representing pharmacy students by law .Are matters of accommodation now matters that are irrelevant messages that fall under the discretion of the Public relations officer that can be deleted? Accommodation is essential and forms part of the necessaries of every student on campus and matters regarding it should not be disregarded or even deleted by the defendants. That being said, I see the acts of the defendants as arbitrary, illegal and not founded in law .
I also resolve the issue in favor of the claimants and I grant all orders granted by my learned brother, Hon. Justice Ismail Khadijat Moromoke, CJSU.
CONCURRENT JUDGEMENT OF HONOURABLE JUSTICE ASHIMI SAOBAN
ADEDAYO, JSU
I have had the enormous time to read and digest with utmost concentration the arguments of the Counsel to the claimants and defendants. I also have the privilege and honor to examine the ruling of this honourable court on the two Preliminary Objections raised by the Defendants in this matter.
Having had the advantage of a preview of the reasons for Judgment just delivered by my learned brother, ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE, C.J.S.U, I am in total agreement with his opinion on the sole issue raised in the suit and I adopt his reasons as mine.
However, I must not fail to add in order to ventilate my concern throughout this case; However, I will add these few comments of mine by way of pontification. The claimants argued that the office of the senators as established by the Students’ Union Constitution is not subjected to the offices of the defendants as Senate offices are distinct in respect to existence and discharge of
  62

duties. Without mincing words, the Claimants in this suit are Senators of the Students’ Union Senate Council and representatives of the entire members of Pharmaceutical Association of Nigerian Students, Unilorin Chapter. In accordance with the definition of representative proffered by the Blacks’ Law Dictionary by Bryan A. Garner 10th Edition, pg. 1494, a representative is someone who stands for or acts on behalf of another.
The 2nd Defendant averred in an affidavit particularly paragraph 6 that:
To prevent Spamming or posting of irrelevant messages on this official platform, there are some laid down rules which are in place which have been passed down from one Administration to another .
Per TOBI, J.C.A. (as he then was) in Onagoruwa v. I.G.P., the distinction between an oppressive conduct, an arbitrary conduct and an unconstitutional act was well espoused.
“An oppressive conduct is an overburden some conduct; a tyrannical and overpowering conduct. An arbitrary conduct is a despotic, capricious and absolute conduct arising mainly from accident rather than from an established rule. An unconstitutional act is an act committed outside the provisions of the Constitution or in more general language, act which is outside the law; or an illegal act.”
In the course of maintaining law and order, compliance with the law or in another sense preventing breach of rules and regulations, one need not be extremely stringent. To the best of my knowledge, the distinguished senators are reputable members of the Union who the court presumes, as a matter of fact discharge the responsibilities imposed on them by the law diligently. Besides, in as much as the publications are not worthless or irrelevant, the claimants should not be impeded from discharging their duties, one of which is disseminating information to the members of the Association whom they represent.
In addendum, the 2nd claimant averred particularly, in paragraphs 9-11 of the 2nd affidavit that:
9. That the call was made to the senators and I approached the sub dean of the faculty of pharmaceutical sciences
10. That the sub-dean required that I provide him with the list of the affected students
11. That I sent a notice to the group requesting for the said list
As a matter of fact, information from the Dean of Students Affairs are proper to be sent by the Senators representing the Faculty as they are the direct source through whom the information can be passed. The Senators provided for in the Students Union Constitution are Representatives of the members of the Union at the Senate Council and in my own opinion, as Senators, they should be able to convey information pertaining to the members of PANS as students who are represented by the Senators in question at the Senate Council.
On other observations made during the course of hearing this matter, at the first hearing, the learned Counsel to the Claimants made the court embark on a voyage of discovery in respect to the absence of ‘that’ in the respective Defendants’ affidavit placing heavy reliance on the Evidence Act 2011 and Oaths Act 2004. At a point, the argument was withdrawn by the Learned Silk. Upon a careful perusal of the Claimants’ entire process, particularly the affidavits deposed to by each claimant, I was not surprised with the persistent tautology of the word ‘that’ on the face of the affidavits. Borrowing the dictum of my noble Lord Niki Tobi JSC (as he then was) in
63

the case of Eze v. Okolonji (1997) 7 NWLR (Pt. 513) 515 on the insignificance of using "that" in commencing new paragraph in affidavit, it was posited that it is a style which has hardened into a tradition for a paragraph in an affidavit to commence with the now overburdened word of "that". No affidavit is regarded as good without that word.
Because of the regular use of the word, an affidavit without it looks "naked", having not on it the required "clothing". Per Ashimi Saoban, JSU, in the case of ADEDEJI FAVOUR ADEYINKA v THE DIRECTOR OF INFORMATION OF THE STUDENTS' UNION BAR ASSOCIATION & ANOR with suit number SUC/UIL/JC/OJ/003/24-25, it is an unnecessary determiner which requires no further repetition. One thing I would like to add to this is that counsel can do much better.
I must comment on the Defendants' brief, which could benefit from more elegant writing. Generally, writers must adhere to established standards, especially when submitting work for publication or competition. Failure to do so can impact the work's reception, regardless of its content quality. This principle applies to legal briefs, academic essays, and other forms of writing. Although, the court has no choice but to resonate with the argument built on it for the purpose of administering justice. This was the position of the court in Fulani v. State (2019) 1 NWLR (Pt. 1653) 237, the court observed that a brief of argument, even though inelegant and badly drafted is still a brief and the argument built on it will still be taken into consideration in conformity with the court’s attitude to do substantial justice. See also Akpan v. State (1992) 6 NWLR (Pt. 248) 439; Jeric (Nig.) Ltd v. UBN Plc(2000) 4 NWLR (Pt. 691) 447; Fasanya v. Adekoya (2000) 15 NWLR (Pt. 689).
For the above reasoning and more detailed reasons advanced by my learned brother, Hon. Justice Ismail Khadijat Moromoke, I hold that defendants indeed hampered the realization of the plans, programs and project of the Distinguished Senators representing the interests of the members of the Pharmaceutical Association of Nigerian Students Unilorin Chapter and hereby resolve the sole issue couched by my learned brother in his lead judgement in favor of the Claimants.
APPEARANCES:
FOR THE CLAIMANTS:
PRINCE P. O. OYEBANJI, SAU, SALC (Lead Counsel) H. A. AMOLEGBE
H A. AREMU
H. A. ADEYEMO
FOR THE DEFENDANTS:
M. A. AJENIFUJA, SAU (Lead Counsel) B. A. BALOGUN
E. T. OGUNDIPE D. D. AFOLABI O. A. AKINTOLA
