SOLIU SOFIYAT & ANOR V PRESIDENT OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION BAR & ANOR 

 IN THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN
HOLDEN AT UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN
ON TUESDAY, THE 24TH OF DECEMBER, 2024. SUIT “NO:SUC/UIL /JC /OJ/001/2024” CITATION: (2025) 1 USLR 
BEFORE THEIR LORDSHIPS
MUHAMMED KAMALDEEN GBEMISOLA JUSTICE OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT
AIWINILOMO FATIMAH ADUKE JUSTICE OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT SIDEEQ ZAKARIYAH JUSTICE OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT
1. SOLIU SOFIYAT DAMILOLA
2. AKANBI MARDHIYYAH OLUWAKEMI................................... Claimants AND
1. PRESIDENT OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION BAR ASSOCIATION
2. EXECUTIVE COUNCIL, STUDENTS’ UNION BAR ASSOCIATION
UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN...................................................... Defendants.       RATIO DECIDENDI
The golden rule of interpretation of statue is to determine and reflect the intention of the law maker. When the intention is clear, resort cannot be had to a liberal interpretation to incorporate words not expressly put in the statute. The intention of the legislature is to be derived from the precise words used in the enactment. The court has to endeavour to discover the intention of the law makers from words used in their ordinary and natural sense without references to previous cases in the first instance. The promotion of the letter and spirit of the enactment must be considered. [INEC v. Musa (2003) 3 NWLR (Pt. 806) 72; Ibrahim v. J.S.C.(1998) 14 NWLR (Pt.584) 1; Miscellaneous Offences Tribunal v. Okoroafor (2001) 18 NWLR (Pt. 745) 295; Omoijahe v. Umoru (1999) 8 NWLR (Pt. 614) 178 referred to.] (Pp. 508-509, paras. H-B; 509, paras. G-H)
NOTABLE HOLDINGS
1. ON CONDITION PRECEDENT
A condition precedent is a requirement that must be fulfilled before a party can commence legal action in a court of law. Where a condition precedent is provided for, it must be followed strictly otherwise the court will be robed to entertain such a matter. AKPAJI V UDEMBA (2009) 6 NWLR (PT 1138)545 @575-576.- PER MUHAMMED KAMALDEEN GBEMISOLA, JSU
3    2. ON MEANING OF THE WORD SHALL
Again, the court has in several cases held that when the word ‘shall’ is used in the construction of a statute it is to be interpreted to mean ‘futurity, a mandate, or direction or giving permission.it is a form of command or mandate. SEE UGWU V ARARUME (2007) 12 NWLR (PT1048) 367;EMORDI V IGBEKE(2011) 9 NWLR (PT.1251)24;TABILKINVI LTD V GTB PLC(2011)17 NWLR PT 1276) 240;AMOSHIMA VSTATE(2011) 6 SCNJ 245. -PER MUHAMMED KAMALDEEN GBEMISOLA, JSU
3. DEFINITION OF A MONTH
It is not the intendment of the legislature for a month which implies 30 days or 4 weeks to mean 16 days but rather for it to mean its full 30 days- PER MUHAMMED KAMALDEEN GBEMISOLA, JSU
4. ON GOLDEN RULE OF INTERPRETATION
The Golden Rule permits deviation from the literal meaning of words when such a literal interpretation would lead to absurdity or inconsistency with the overall purpose of the legislation.
The Golden Rule of Interpretation, ensuring that the intent of the Constitution is upheld while avoiding absurd or impractical outcomes. As aptly observed in the cases of ATTORNEY- GENERAL OF THE FEDERATION V. ABUBAKAR (2007) 11 NWLR (PT. 1044) 1 AND PATRICK JOSEPH AKPAN V. FEDERAL ROAD SAFETY COMMISSION AND 3 ORS NICN/CA/14/2021 OF THE NATIONAL INDUSTRIAL COURT NIGERIA- PER SIDEEQ ZAKARIYAH, JSU JUDGEMENT AND ORDER
My lords, permit me to say that the first issue raised by the claimant has been judicially decided upon and needs not further be decided. This noble court per my lord, Honorable justice Ismail Khadijah (JSU now CJSU ) held in the case of IBRAHIM SAMIAT OYINDAMOLA & 3 ORS V PRESIDENT OF THE BAR & ANOR that the word ‘shall as used in the provision of section 7(1) part A of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution 2017 as amended means mandatoriness and compulsion. Again, the court has in several cases held that when the word ‘shall’ is used in the construction of a statute it is to be interpreted to mean ‘futurity, a mandate, or direction or giving permission.it is a form of command or mandate. SEE UGWU V ARARUME (2007) 12 NWLR (PT1048) 367; EMORDI V IGBEKE(2011) 9 NWLR (PT.1251) 24; TABILKINVI LTD V GTB PLC(2011)17 NWLR PT 1276) 240; AMOSHIMA VSTATE(2011) 6 SCNJ 245.
On issue two couched, it is evident from issue one above that the constitutional provision is unclear and ambiguous and need no careful scrutiny that may lead to reckoning one in a month to start ticking from the first day of resumption. Flowing from the meaning of a month meaning 30 days or 4 weeks and by the provision of Section 18 of the interpretation Act which a month as a calendar month reckoned according to the Gregorian calendar.
COURT RECORDS
At the court ,the claimants who are also the claimant counsels objected to have been served any preliminary objection by the 1st defendant in this instant case, the President of the Bar. In response to the objection raised the counsel to the 1st defendant replied stating that the 1st.  defendant wishes to adopt the preliminary objection raised by the 2nd defendant in this instant case .this led the court to raising an issue suo moto which was:
WHETHER OR NOT A PROCESS NOT FILED BY THE 1ST DEFENDANT IN THIS INSTANT CASE MAY BE ADOPTED BY IT
The counsel to the first defendant contended that the process filed by the second defendant could be adopted as that of the first defendant. Relying on the case of ITA vs DADZIE (2000) NWLR R pt 6052 168, the court of appeal held as follows:
“it is a normal procedure and practice to allow simple amendments like correction of grammatical error, addition or deletion of words in the pleading or any court record by oral application rather than asking the applicant to come by way of motion”, the court further stated that , this is will no doubt save time and expenses. He furtheradded that a perusal of order 3, Rule 1 of the Students’ Union Court 2023 (as reviewed), where it is clearly stated that:
Where in beginning or purporting to begin any proceeding, there has been, by anything done or left undone ,a failure to comply with the requirement of these rules, the failure shall nullify the proceedings, provided that where the failure to comply with the requirement herein is not gainst substantive rule of law, the failure shall be treated as an irregularity and may not nullify the proceedings bust shall entitle the court to give any direction as it thinks fit to regularize such irregularity. In application, he contended that this is just a simple amendment, and that this court can allow counsel to make addition, subtraction, or deletion using an oral application instead of motion. In response, counsel to the claimant agreed with the line of argument of the learned counsel to the first defendant and counsel placed heavy reliance on the case of AGORO vs OYEGBEMI (2013) NWLR pt 1358, where the Court of Appeal held that a defendant can adopt the preliminary objection of a co-defendant without filing a separate motion. Counsel humbly submitted that the 1st defendant kindly go on with his oral application.
RULING OF THE COURT ON THE ISSUE RAISED SUO MUTO
After listening to the arguments of both counsels in this instant case ,this court must say that per law, amendments of processes must come as a general rule through a motion whether oral
or written. The provision of the students’ union court rules 2023 (as reviewed) particularly order 3 rule 1provides to the effect that Where in beginning or purporting to begin any proceeding, there has been, by anything done or left undone ,a failure to comply with the requirement of these rules, the failure shall nullify the proceedings, provided that where the failure to comply with the requirement herein is not against substantive rule of law, the failure shall be treated as an irregularity and may not nullify the proceedings bust shall entitle the court to give any direction as it thinks fit to regularize such irregularity. The above provision is clear as it envisages situations wherein non fulfillment of certain requirements of the Students’ Union Court rules will lead to nullity of the proceeding. As a proviso, it further provides that where the failure in question is not against a substantive rule it shall be treated as a mere regularity and may not nullify the proceedings. The question that begs for answer is whether the above issue is a requirement of any substantive law. The answer is a capital NO! In fact the court is no longer inclined towards technicalities but achieving justice see the case of MAITUNBI V BARAYA (2017) 2 NWLR PART 1550 P247, where it was held thus: Reliance on technicalities, which could be due to human error and slip- ups, leads to injustice. Trivial and trifling mistakes or
5
errors are likely to be made by litigants or by counsels and this however should not deprive a party from having his complaint or matter properly ventilated and determined on the merits. See the cases of OKUNLADE V AZEEZ (2009)LPELR 4730,NGIGE V OBI (2006) 14 NWLR(PT 991), AG BENDEL STATE V A.G FEDERATION (1981)10 SC 1.
Additionally, my lords of the court of appeal held in the case of AGORO vs OYEGBEMI (2013) NWLR pt 1358 held that a defendant can adopt the preliminary objection of a co defendant in the same case without filing a separate motion before the court . Counsel to the first defendant is hereby granted the leave to amend the process filed by the second defendant orally.
My noble lords, permit me to return back to the preliminary objection filed by the defendants in this instant case. The preliminary objection raised by the defendants goes down to the root of this case as it bothers on the jurisdiction of the court. The issues are :
WHETHER OR NOT APPROACHING THE RESOLUTION COMMITTEE IS A CONDITION PRECEDENT IN THIS CASE
ARGUMENTS OF BOTH PARTIES ON THE ISSUE RAISED
Flowing from the argument of the defendants, they contended that approaching the dispute resolution committee is a condition precedent which must be fulfilled before the institution of this case
ARGUMENTS OF DEFENDANTS
The term condition precedent, giving a simple and stringent elucidation, is an event or state of affairs that must occur or exist before a right or contractual obligation becomes enforceable or a party’s liability arises. They argued that, a condition precedent is a requirement that must be fulfilled before a party can commence legal action in a court of law. Relying the Supreme Court made this point per ADEREMI JSC in AKPAJI V UDEMBA (2009) 6 NWLR (PT 1138)545 @ 575—576 E-A, where the court held that ‘The condition precedent must not only be fulfilled, it must be seen to be properly fulfilled. Where a precondition for initiating a legal process is laid down, any suit instituted in contravention of the pre condition provision is incompetent and the court lacks jurisdiction to entertain same.’ To buttress their point, the provision of Article 8(1) (e) of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution (2018 as revised) which establishes the Dispute Resolution committee as one of the standing committee was referred to, with its function spelt out in E as thus;
The Dispute resolution committee
i. Shall receive, investigate and determine complaints by members of the association applying the principles of arbitration, mediation and reconciliation.
In furthering their argument, recourse was made to Article 10 of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution (2018 as revised) unequivocally without ambiguity provides that
“No aggrieved member shall resort to the court unless his/her complaint must have been considered and disposed off by the Dispute Resolution Committee...”. Your Lordship, this provision is crystal clear beyond recondite of doubt that the intent of the drafters was to ensure that something must be done or must happen in a particular case before one is entitled to institute an action. They further claimed that the claimants have in no way shown the fulfillment of the
condition precedent pursuant to Article 8(1)(e) of the Students' union bar constitution (2018 as 6

revised). My lords, your learned brother in this same jurisdiction, Justice T. A. Jamiu JSC( as he then was) in the case of Okwara Lawrence v Student Union Bar Association (2023) 3 USLR pg 39, made this point that;
"If a condition precedent is not complied with, the action is incompetent and the court shall thereby be divested of jurisdiction."
With this my Noble lords, they humbly submit on this issue that approaching the Resolution Committee is a condition precedent in this case.
On the second issue of the preliminary objection ,which is on whether or not this court has jurisdiction to entertain this matter.Counsels answered in the negative flowing from the argument on the first issue of their preliminary objection. Counsels relied on the case of This is seen is the case of Madukolu v Nkemdilim (1962) 2 ALL NLR 581. The court in the case of Chris v ononuju (2008) 9 NWLR (Pt 1093) 642 at 651, Per Tsamiya J.C.A, held that:
A court will be competent to assume jurisdiction on a matter where
(a) The court is properly constituted as regards number and qualification of the members of the bench;
(b) The subject matter of the action is within the jurisdiction of the court; and
(c) The case before the court is initiated by due process of law, or that the condition precedent to the exercise of jurisdiction is complied with.
They argued that due process was not followed and hence the jurisdiction of this court has been ousted.
WHETHER OR NOT THE BREACH OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION BAR CONSTITUTION CAN BE SUBJECTED TO ALTERNATIVE RESOLUTION DISPUTE It was the claimants’ contention on this issue that the breach of the Students’ Union Bar constitution cannot be subjected to alternative dispute resolution.subject to the provision of article 8 rule 1e (ii) of the Students’ Union Bar constitution with the dispute resolution committee shall receive, investigate and determine complains by the members of the association applying the principle of arbitration, mediation and reconciliation. My lords, it expressly said dispute resolution, the meaning of dispute in the case of River State vs Ag AkwaIbom State (2011) 8 NWLR pt 1248 31, the court held that:
a dispute involves art of agruments, controversy, claim as to right whether in law or fact or varying opinions.
In case of NURTW vs OGODO (1998) 2NWLR pt 537, 189, the court of Appeal held:
dispute means to make a subject or argument to contend for.
In OBIECHEFU vs GOVERNOR OF IMO STATE (2008) 14 NWLR pt 1106, 22 (CA), KSMH vs MIEE (2012) 3 NWLR pt 1287, 258 (CA), the breach of the Students’ Union Bar constitution goes to the root of the case and cannot be over emphasized, the constitution of the Students’ Union Bar cannot be subject to the whims and caprices of the dispute resolution committee. As seen in the earlier cases, a breach of constitution cannot be contended by alternative dispute resolution, the breach of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution particularly in this instance cannot be subjected to resolution by the dispute resolution committee”
7

RULING OF THE COURT ON THE PRELIMINARY OBJECTION
My noble lords ,in order to properly rule on this case ,this court shall be adopting a new issue which is
WHETHER DUE TO THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THIS CASE, THE CONDITION PRECEDENT OF APPROACHING THE DISPUTE RESOLUTION COMMITEE SET BY THE SECTION 10 IS APPLICABLE
To my mind, this issue settles it all and will upon proper dissection give answers to the preliminary objection raised by the defendants. I must say that, condition precedents is one which delays the vesting of a right until the happening of an event. See SHITTU V IKERE L.G & ORS (2019)LPELR -49351(CA);OLOJA &ORS V GOVERNOR OF BENUE STATE & ORS 9(2015)LPELR-24583(CA). I must not but agree with the counsels to the defendant that a condition precedent is a requirement that must be fulfilled before a party can commence legal action in a court of law. Where a condition precedent is provided for, it must be followed strictly otherwise the court will be robed to entertain such a matter. AKPAJI V UDEMBA (2009) 6 NWLR (PT 1138)545 @575-576.
My noble Lords, ,a lot of questions begs for answers flowing from the arguments of the defendants, is there any dispute in question which can be referred to the dispute resolution committee? Are constitutionally prescribed duty subject to the whims and caprices of a dispute resolution committee? Is the matter before this court an arbitrable matter which can be referred to an ADR committee?
Firstly, to my mind, I believe the case at hand is not one of the complaint entertainable by the dispute resolution committee. The process before this court is an originating summons which by law is used for the interpretation of a written law or statute to which the Students’ Union Bar Constitution (2018 as revised) is one see the case of FAJIMI V SPEAKER, WESTERN HOUSE OFASSEMBLY(1962)1 SCNLR 300, DOHERTY V DOHERTY(1968)NMLR 21. No doubt, the Constitution of the Students’ Union Bar is supreme and can only be interpreted by this honorable court and not by a committee created for settling dispute or complaints accruing from the business of the bar and its members.
No doubt, condition precedent is a must fulfilled obligation imposed upon parties and it's none fulfillment makes any preceding action void.This is as encapsulated in golden words of my learned brother Honourable Justice T. A. Jamiu JSC ( as he then was) in the case of Okwara Lawrence v Students’ Union Bar Association (2023) 3 USLR pg 39,
"If a condition precedent is not complied with, the action is incompetent and the court shall thereby be divested of jurisdiction.
The provision of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution is clear and unambiguous as it provides provides in Article 8(1) paragraph (e) for the Dispute Resolution Committee of the Bar with the duties.
My lords, allow me reproduce the provision;
Dispute Resolution Committee
 8

ii. Shall receive, investigate and determine complaints by members of the association applying the principles of arbitration, mediation and reconciliation.
iii. Provided that every such complaint of any member shall be determined by the committee within fourteen (14) days of receipts of the complaint.
iv. Shall carry out any other function that be assigned to it by the president or the Executive council.
Making recourse to the provision of iv above ,it is clear that the underlying principles to which the dispute resolution committee will be adjudicating on any matter or complaint is the principles of arbitration ,mediation and reconciliation. The question this spells out is whether a constitutionally prescribed duty can be referred to ADR. My lords, according to the court in the case of KANO STATE URBAN DEVELOPMENT BOARD V FANZ CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LTD (1990) 4 NWLR (Pt. 142) 1, 32-33,
it was held that the following cases are not arbitrable
(a) An indictment for an offence of public nature
(b) Disputes arising from illegal contract
(c) Dispute arising under void agreement as being by way of gaming or wagering (d) Dispute leading to a change of status:
This matter falls under the category of (d) for the interpretation will have to do with the whether the Executive Council of the Bar has a duty or not. Accordingly and without prejudice to the provision of Article 10 of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution which is claimed to be a disbarring element which provides to the effect thus:
‘No aggrieved member shall resort to the court unless his /her complaint must have been considered and disposed off by the dispute resolution committee’...
Also, by a cursory look at the provisions of Article 8 (1 )the Students’ Union Bar Constitution 2018 as reviewed:
The Association shall have the following Standing Committees: a. Judiciary Committee;
b. Law Reform Committee;
c. Disciplinary Committee;
d. Legal Education Committee;
e. Dispute Resolution Committee;
f. Electoral Committee;
‘And such other committees as may be created by the Executive Council or General Meeting from time to time.’
From the proviso thereunder: and such other committees as may be created by the Executive Council or General Meeting from time to time.
It appears that the dispute resolution committee is a child of the executive council and hence the
executive council is it's mother. Hence it behooves the twin principle of Natural justice to wit; 9

Nemo Judex in causa sua (a party cannot be a judge in his own case) and audi altarem partem (hear both sides) to refer cases relating to the executive council to it as the case before this honorable court is against the Executive council. See; CHARLES OKEKE V THE LEGAL PRACTITIONERS DISCIPLINARY COMMITEEE (2005) LCN /3290 (SC), ONAKOYA V FRN (2002)11 NWLR PT 779; DEDUWA V OKORODUDU (1976)9-10 SC.
Also, flowing from the provision of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution Article 2 paragraph h,which provides for the aims and objective of Students Union bar association particularly: “Encouragement and protection of the right of access to courts at reasonably affordable fees and of representation counsels before the court.”
The principle of access to justice is in itself the cornerstone of every democratic society and it has gained judicial recognition in the Fons et origo of Nigeri,1999 as amended under the provision of Section 36 as follows :
In the determination of his civil rights and obligations, including any questions or determination by or against any government or authoritya fair hearing within a reasonable time by a court or other tribunal established by law and constituted in such a manner as to secure its independence and impartiality".
My lords, The court held in the case of Amadi v. NNPC (2000) 10 NWLR (Pt. 674) 76 the court held that:
"Access to court implies approach or means of approach to court without constraint".
The above pronouncement of the courts was further buttressed in the case of Idris v. Agumagu (2015) 13 NWLR (Pt. 1477) 441, p. 480, paras. C
Indisputably as provided for that one of the main objectives of the Students' union bar association is to protect and give access to courts and hence it is of utmost importance even for the judiciary itself. It is on this note ,that this court finds the preliminary objection of the defendants unmeritorious and as such cannot fly.
On issue two which is on whether or not this court has jurisdiction to entertain this matter. Jurisdiction is a matter of law and not of fact. Jurisdiction per my lord NGWUTU JSCis defined as the limits imposed on the power of a validly constituted court to hear and determine issues between persons seeking to avail themselves of its process... SEE AG LAGOS STATE V DOSUNMU (1989) 3 NWLR PT111552 SC.ALL PROGRESIVE GRAND ALLIANCE &ANOR V SENATOR CHRISTIANA N.D &ANOR (2014) AELR 2915 SC. ACCORDING TO THE LOCUS CLASSICUS CASE of Madukolu v Nkemdilim (1962) 2 ALL NLR 581. The court in the case of Chris v Ononuju (2008) 9 NWLR (Pt 1093) 642 at 651, Per Tsamiya J.C.A, held that, a court will be competent to assume jurisdiction on a matter where
(a) The court is properly constituted as regards number and qualification of the members of the bench;
(b) The subject matter of the action is within the jurisdiction of the court; and
(c) The case before the court is initiated by due process of law, or that the condition
precedent to the exercise of jurisdiction is complied with.
To my mind, this court has jurisdiction as all conditions are met. Due to the above ,the court ordered the defendants to file their defence on Tuesday, 17th of December 2024 on or before 3:00pm. I must at this point comment on the attitude of counsels to the defendants who decide to flout the order of this court by filing same on the 18th of December, 2024 at the hours of 6:44pm.
10

Imust reiterate that the order of this court is a must for counsels to follow and not only followed but followed judiciously and at the time the court has prescribed and accompanying their defense is a 6 paragraph affidavit in supportof their claim and two issues for the kind and just determination of this court as follows:
1. WHETHER THE INTERPRETATION OF MONTH AS USED IN SECTION 7(1) PART A OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION BAR CONSTITUTION 2017 AS AMENDED RECKONS FROM THE DATE OF RESUMPTION
2. WHETHER OR NOT THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL PARTICULARLY THE PRESIDENT OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION BAR HAS FAILED TO PERFORM ITS FUNCTION AS IT HAS BEEN LAID DOWN IN THE STUDENTS’ UNION BAR CONSTITUTION 2017 AS AMENDED.
On issue one, it was the contention of the defendants that the court is to adopt the golden rule of interpretation for the interpretation of section 7(1) part A of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution as amended. They drew inferences from the rule guiding the golden rule of interpretation of the constitution which is to the effect that the purpose of the golden rule of interpretation of statute is to determine and reflect the intention of the law maker. When the intention is clear, resort cannot be had to a liberal interpretation to incorporate words not expressly put in the statute. The intention of the legislature is to be derived from the precise words used in the enactment. The court has to endeavour to discover the intention of the law makers fromords used in their ordinary and natural sense without references to previous cases in the first instance. The promotion of the letter and spirit of the enactment must be considered. [INEC v. Musa (2003) 3 NWLR (Pt. 806) 72; Ibrahim v. J.S.C. (1998) 14 NWLR (Pt. 584) 1; Miscellaneous Offences Tribunal v. Okoroafor (2001) 18 NWLR (Pt. 745) 295; Omoijahe v. Umoru (1999) 8 NWLR (Pt. 614) 178 referred to.] (Pp. 508-509, paras. H-B; 509, paras. G-H)
The word in phrase in contention “once in a month” is to their mind as used by constitution and using the golden rule of interpretation implies since resumption of academic session. The Niger Ins. Co. v. NAL Merchant Bank (1996) 2NWLR (Pt. 430) 370, Yasaba v. Donkin (1998) 7 NWLR (Pt. 556) 162
On the meaning of a month reliance was placed on the provision of Section 18 of the interpretation act to mean one calender month reckoned according to the Gregorian calendar. The defendants thereby submitted using the golden rule that the once in a month prescribed in the provision of SECTION 7(1) PART A OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION BAR CONSTITUTION 2017 AS AMENDED reckons one calender month from the date of resumption. Having established the aforementioned in issue one above ,the defendants proceeded relying on their submission above and paragraph 4 and 5, as deposed to by one Oladimeji Afeezat, a member of the bar, particularly paragraph 4 and 5, it can be seen that the Executive council did held a general meeting within the timeframe of one month from the school, University of Ilorin, resumption of its 2024/2025 academic session on the 14th of October, 2024 and 16th of November,2024. In replying on point of law, counsels to the claimant couched an issue which is whether or not the golden rule of interpretation is applicable in this instant case.the claimants contended that the golden rule is not applicable in this instant case. Relying on the case of AG BENDEL V AG FEDERATION (1981) 10 SC ,UWAIFO V AG BENDEL STATE (1982) 7
11

SC 124 ,NIGERIAN NATIONAL PETROLEUM CORPORATION V FAMFA OIL LTD (2012) 17 NWLR PT 148 ,CBN V INTERSTELLAR COMMUNICATIONS LTD (2018) 10 NWLR PT 1628@ 217 wherein the court deployed the literal rule of interpretation and held that where the wordings of the constitution is clear and unambiguous language, the literal rule is to be adopted.
LEAD JUDGEMENT OF HONORABLE JUSTICE MUHAMMED KAMALDEEN
GBEMISOLA
My lords, permit me to say that the first issue raised by the claimant has been judicially decided upon and needs not further be decided. This noble court per my lord, Honorable justice Ismail Khadijah (JSU now CJSU ) held in the case of IBRAHIM SAMIAT OYINDAMOLA & 3 ORS V PRESIDENT OF THE BAR & ANOR that the word ‘shall as used in the provision of section 7(1) part A of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution 2017 as amended means mandatoriness and compulsion. Again, the court has in several cases held that when the word ‘shall’ is used in the construction of a statute it is to be interpreted to mean ‘futurity, a mandate, or direction or giving permission.it is a form of command or mandate. SEE UGWU V ARARUME (2007) 12 NWLR (PT1048) 367; EMORDI V IGBEKE(2011) 9 NWLR (PT.1251) 24; TABILKINVI LTD V GTB PLC(2011)17 NWLR PT 1276) 240; AMOSHIMA VSTATE(2011) 6 SCNJ 245.
1. WHETHER OR NOT THE PROVISION OF SECTION 7(1) PART A OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION BAR CONSTITUTION CAN BE INTERPRETED USING THE GOLDEN RULE TO MEAN “ONCE IN A MONTH FROM RESUMPTION.
2. WHETHER OR NOT THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL PARTICULARLY THE PRESIDENT OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION BAR HAS FAILED TO PERFORM ITS FUNCTION AS IT HAS BEEN LAID DOWN IN THE STUDENTS’ UNION BAR CONSTITUTION 2017 AS AMENDED
Before moving to the issue, I must restate here once again that the defendants has brought another originating summons and not a defense so to say.arguments from both sides have been carefully read. The traditional duty of this court is to interprete the law of the land, and it must carry out this duty with utmost diligence and intelligence. This is in fact one of the duties as spelt out in the supreme law of our land in SECTION 15 (5) PARAGRAPH A of the Students’ Union Constitution 2022 as revised which spells out the functions and powers of the judiciary. My lords, permit me to point out the salient provisions of the constitution that points out the interpretative powers of this court
a. shall decide all questions of interpretation of this constitution ,any other enactments of the Students’ Union and/or constitutions and/or enactments of faculties, departments, clubs, associations and societies registered with the appropriate university authority.
To facilitate the effective and efficient discharge of this constitutionally prescribed function, the courts has fashioned out , like a fashion designer some principles /canons of interpretation to guide the proper interpretation of the laws to achieve just the literal rule of interpretation has
been severally and on many occasions held to be the first recourse of a court in interpreting the
  12

provisions of the any statute .in fact ,it is a condition precedent that the first test to be taken by a court is to ascribe a case to the literal rule of interpretation. These are well encapsulated in the golden words of My learned brother ,Honourable justice Azeez Mujeeb opeyemi , CJSU (as he then was ) in the case of YUSUF MISBAUDEEN ADEYEMI V STUDENTS’ REPRESENTATIVES COUNCIL OF NIGERIAN UNIVERSITIES ENGINEERING STUDENTS ASSOCIATION,UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN 2018 6 USLR
“The position of the law as regards the canon of interpretation is that recourse should be first be made to the literal rule while interpreting clear and unambigiousn provisions of the constitution or statute .As such ,courts have from time immemorial been enjoined to not bother itself in search for other interpretation canons, magnifying glasses or any of such when they are convinced that statutes in quo are clear and ex lege unambigious ”. SEE the cases of INAKOJU V ADELEKE (2007) 4 NWLR (pt 1025),OJOKOLOBO V ALAMU (1987) 3 NWLR (PT 61).AHMED V KASSIM (1985) SCNLR 58.
The golden rule of interpretation has received a judicial ointment and blessings from plethora of cases as to its applicability and rules guiding its applicability. I must at this point agree with the defendants that the The golden rule of interpretation of statue is to determine and reflect the intention of the law maker. The intention of the legislature is to be derived from the precise words used in the enactment. The court has to endeavour to discover the intention of the law makers from the words used in their ordinary and natural sense without references to previous cases in the first instance. The promotion of the letter and spirit of the enactment must be considered. [INEC v. Musa (2003) 3 NWLR (Pt. 806) 72; Ibrahim v. J.S.C. (1998) 14 NWLR (Pt. 584) 1 ; Miscellaneous Offences Tribunal v. Okoroafor (2001) 18 NWLR (Pt. 745) 295; Omoijahev. Umoru (1999) 8 NWLR (Pt. 614) 178 referred to.] (Pp. 508-509, paras. H-B; 509, paras. G-H).
Counsels in this instant case has argued for and against the use of the golden rule of interpretation with suggestive laws to back up their claims and the rationale for such argumennts .my lords, permit me to reproduce like a child the provision of the law which is need of a magnifying glasses for its proper interpretation. Section 7 (1) paragraph A provides as follows;
“There shall be a general meeting held at least once in a month called general meeting”
To be able to interpret the above section, recourse must be had to the provision of the earlier cited SECTION 18 OF THE INTERPRETATION ACT Which defines a month as one calendar month reckoned according to the Gregorian calendar. Accordingly, the court in the case of NIGER INSURANCE CO LTD V NAL MERCHANT BANK LTD, a month means calendar month reckoned according to the Gregorian calendar.
The questions begging for answers like beggars during broad daylight are; Are the wordings of Section 7 (1) PART A clear or ambiguous? Are there hidden intendments of the law makers that would be open to this court using a concave lens to magnify? What purpose does the general meeting serve and why is it important to hold one once in a month as prescribed? it is until and unless the above has been carefully answered that the rule can be deciphered. To the first question my noble lords, the wordings of the provision seems clear but quite unclear and ambiguous, and needs scrutiny. When does the one month start? A tasky question that comes to my mind .of course, it is impossible for meetings of the bar to be held during the holidays.The 13

counting of one month should therefore start from the date of resumption.What then is the definition a month?
By the definition of the Black’s law dictionary 10th edition, page 1161 as to the meaning of month, any time period approximating 30 days, one twelfth of a trophical year, the time it takes the sun to pass through one sign of the zodiac, usually approximating 30 days.
According to the Merriam Webster dictionary 2024, it defines a month as A measure of time corresponding nearly to the period of the moon’s revolutioin and amounting to approximately 4 weeks or 30 days or 1/12 of a year.
Applying the above definitions to this instant case ,a month will be said to mean approximately 4 weeks or 30 days. Logically, a month in this case started from 14th of October, then a month will be 14th November using the definition offered above. It is a literal interpretation to say 14th October to 31st Oct is a month. A month is not 16 days. A month is 4 weeks or 30 days which isn’t relatable 16 days in question. No doubt the purpose of every interpretation exercise is to ascertain the intention of the law makers and the purpose of the law itself .this is as held in the case of FBN PLC V MAIWADA (2013) 5 NWLR PT 1348 444 P.484, PARAGRAPH a-b as follows:
It is the function of judges to keep the law alive ,in motion and to make it progressive for the purpose of arriving at the end of justice ,without being inhibited by technicalities to find every conceivable but accepted way of avaoiding narrowness that would spell injustice short of a judge being a legislator ,a judge must possess an aggressive stance in interpreting the law .See also the cases of OKOTIE EBOH V MANAGER (2004) 18 NWLR (PT 905) 242
To my mind ,it is not the intendment of the legislature for a month which implies 30 days or 4 weeks to mean a 16 days but rather for it to mean its full 30 days. Illustratively, what would a month mean if the school had resumed from the 22nd day of October? Will it imply that a month is some 9 days ?will that be fair and equitable to the defendants ?all answers are to my mind in the negative. It is clear from paragraph 4 of the defendants’ affidavit in support of the defense and also paragraph 4 of the claimant’s affidavit, the same point was emphasized as follows;
That I know as a matter of fact that the school, University of Ilorin resumed its 2024/2025 academic session on the 14th October, 2024. If my memory serves me right, for the month of October, only some two weeks existed for the executive council to call a general meeting for the bar and not the 30 days which a month would ordinarily mean.
This is the absurdity the court is against. It is on this note that I resolve this issue in favor of the defendant and holds that the golden rule of interpretation will apply which is 4 weeks or 30 days from the date of resumption and not by applying the literal rule which would only limit the defendants to some 16 days thereabout to call a general meeting of all advocates despite all odds.
On issue two couched, it is evident from issue one above that the constitutional provision is unclear and ambiguous and need no careful scrutiny that may lead to reckoning one in a month to start ticking from the first day of resumption. Flowing from the meaning of a month meaning 30 days or 4 weeks and by the provision of Section 18 of the interpretation Act which a month as a calendar month reckoned according to the Gregorian calendar .
Conjunctively reading the above with the provision of SECTION 7(1) OF THE BAR
CONSTITUTION 2017 is clear as it provides as follows; 14

There shall be a general meeting held at least once in a month called general meeting
it is no doubt that the use of ‘shall’ as used in the provision of Section 7(1) part A of the bar constitution 2017 as amended means compulsion. SEE IBRAHIM SAMIAT OYINDAMOLA & 3 ORS V PRESIDENT OF THE bar & amor UGWU V ARARUME (2007) 12 NWLR (PT 1048) 367; EMORDI V IGBEKE(2011) 9 NWLR (PT.1251)24; TABILKINVI LTD V GTB PLC(2011)17 NWLR PT 1276) 240;AMOSHIMA VSTATE(2011) 6 SCNJ 245.
Unarguably as deposed to in the defendants’ affidavit in support of their defense, particularly paragraph 5:
That I know as a matter of fact that the Executive Council of the Students’ Union Bar Association did held a general meeting on the 13th of November which is within one month of resumption.
Showing that a general meeting was held for the month after resumption which was held on the 13th of November, 2024. Need I add that this fact was not contradicted by the claimant in this case which shows their admission of this fact .fact admitted need not be proved according to the case of It will be antithetical at this point for this court to hold that the 1st and second defendant has failed to bring perform its statutorily prescribed duties. It is on this note that this court resolves issue 2 in favor of the defendants and grants relief 1, 2, 3of the defendant's defence and relief 2 of the claimants and makes no order as to cost.
HONORABLE JUSTICE SIDEEQ ZAKARIYAH (CONCURING JUDGEMENT)
I have had the opportunity to read the draft judgment delivered by my learned brother, Honourable Justice Muhammed Kamaldeen Gbemisola, and I concur with his findings and conclusions in their entirety. The lead judgment accurately interprets the phrase “at least once in a month” as employed in Section 7(1) Part A of the Students’ Union Bar Constitution 2017 (as amended). This provision mandates that a general meeting of the Bar Association be convened at least once within each calendar month during the academic session, recognizing that a typical calendar month consists of 30 or 31 days. The lead judgment effectively applies the Golden Rule of Interpretation, ensuring that the intent of the Constitution is upheld while avoiding absurd or impractical outcomes. As aptly observed in the cases of Attorney-General of the Federation v. Abubakar (2007) 11 NWLR (Pt. 1044) 1 and Patrick Joseph Akpan v. Federal Road Safety Commission and 3 ors NICN/CA/14/2021 of the National Industrial Court Nigeria, the Golden Rule permits deviation from the literal meaning of words when such a literal interpretation would lead to absurdity or inconsistency with the overall purpose of the legislation. In this instance, a literal interpretation of “at least once in a month” as requiring a meeting on any single day within a month would not adequately fulfill the purpose of the constitutional provision, which is to ensure regular and effective communication and decision-making within the Bar Association. By applying the Golden Rule, we arrive at the more reasonable interpretation of “at least one meeting within each calendar month,” ensuring that the Bar Association can effectively conduct its business and fulfill its objectives. I therefore concur with the lead judgment in its entirety
HONOURABLE JUSTICE AIWINNILOMO FATIMAH, JSU (CONCURRING
JUDGEMENT)
  15

I have read in advance the leading judgment of my learned brother Kamaldeen, JSU and I wholly agree with his reasoning and conclusions. I finds it reasonable to apply the Golden Rule of interpretation in determining the precise meaning of the phrase ‘once a month’ as articulated in Section 11 of the Students Union Bar Constitution. This approach ensures clarity in understanding the intended time frame and duration specified therein. In Adewumi v. A.-G., Ekiti State (2002) 2 NWLR (Pt. 751) 474 The supreme Court On Golden rule of interpretation of statute held that:
“It is a canon of Interpretation that the court will lean against a construction that will produce an absurdity or an avoidable invalidity. In the instant case, in the interpretation of section 117 of the Chief’s Edict, the lower courts legitimately employed the canons of interpretation that would best aid the purpose of the law and not to defeat its aim.[Adigun v. Governor of Oyo State (1987) 1 NWLR (Pt. 53) 678 referred to.] (P.524,paras. A-B)
I observes that the literal interpretation presents an absurdity, particularly in the scenario where the school resumes on the 23rd of October. The question arises: would the defendants be compelled to conduct a general meeting between the 23rd and 31st of October? It is my submission that the period from the 23rd to the 31st of October does not constitute a complete month, averaging 30 days. Furthermore, the interval from the 14th of October to the 31st of October is similarly insufficient to meet the definition of a month as stipulated by law. Thus, it is both absurd and invalid for the Congress to convene during the period from the 14th of October to the 31st of October, as this timeframe does not fulfill the legal requirement of a complete month. To further support my argument that the period from the 14th of October to the 31st of October does not constitute a complete month, I hereby rely on the judgment of the Court of Appeal in the case of The Niger Ins. Co. v. NAL Merchant Bank(1996) 2 NWLR (Pt. 430) 370. The court of Appeal On Meaning of a “month”By virtue of the provisions of section 18(1) of the Interpretation Act, a “month” means a calendar month reckoned according to the Gregorian calendar. Applying this, therefore, to the instant case, 3 months from 28th of January, 1992 when the trial court delivered its judgment must be midnight of 28th of April,1992. (P. 375, para. F). Thus, it is my determination that a month commencing from the 14th of October extends to the midnight of the 14th of November. Consequently, the holding of a general meeting at least once within the period from the 14th of October to the 14th of September aligns appropriately with the provisions of the Students Union Bar Constitution.
APPEARANCES:
FOR THE CLAIMANTS
M.O AKANBI
S.D SOLIU
Z.D MUHAMMAD
FOR THE DEFENDANTS M.A AJENIFUJA
A.A OLADIMEJI
16

F.T OLAWUYI
O.T SHOGBOYEJO S.A SALAUDEEN P.O OGUYEMI AMICUS CURIAE O.D FATOYE
A.A OYEWO
F.O AMIN
