1 |  P a g e
 
TAOFIK V THE CLERK, L.S.S. HOUSE OF 
REPRESENTATIVES 
CITATION: (2019) LCELR 1819001 
In the Law Students’ Society Court Of Unilorin 
Suit No: LSSJ/003/2019 
ON TUESDAY, 5TH  FEBRUARY, 2019 
Before Their Lordships: 
Hon. Judge Abdulquadir Abdullahi CJLSS (Presided and read lead judgment) 
Hon. Judge Shuaib Olawale Teslim JLSS- Judge, LSS Court of Unilorin 
Hon. Judge Laufe Bolaji Nasir JLSS- Judge, LSS Court of Unilorin 
BETWEEN 
TAOFIK WALIU OPEYEMI 
CLAIMANT 
 
AND  
THE CLERK, LAW STUDENTS’ SOCIETY HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
DEFENDANT 
 
RATIO DECIDENDI 
1. EVIDENCE: EFFECT OF A DOCUMENT PLEADED BUT NOT TENDERED 
“it follows that the failure of the defendants to tender the exhibits pleaded on his counter -
affidavits is deemed to mean the defendant has abandoned the documents. The defendant who has 
pleaded a document and expects the court to be swayed to give judgment in his favour by the 
documents yet fails to tender the document, the only logical explanation is that he has abandoned 
the document and does not want it to sway the court anymore. The defendants cannot expect the 
court to be look ing for the documents around, which would be very unethical ”. PER 
ABDULLAHI CJLSS at Pg. 6 
2. INTERPRETATION- THE LITERAL RULE OF INTERPRETATION 

2 |  P a g e
 
“when the wordings of a statute are clear, the court in interpreting such it must give its 
ordinary meaning, and there is no need for the court to undergo any voyage of 
discovering in finding the meaning of such word. That will amount to an effort in futility. 
This principle is known as the Literal Rule of Interpretation. In the case of ACHINEKU 
VS ISHAGABA (1988) 4 NWLR pt 89411, the Supreme Court held, that the word 
“shall”, in its ordinary meaning, connotes a command, and that which must be given a 
compulsory meaning. See also BAMAIYI VS A.G FEDERATION (2001) 90 LRCN 
2738.” PER ABDULLAHI CJLSS at Pg. 7 
3. LSS CONSTITUTIONAL LAW - ON THE USE OF THE LSS NOTICE BOARD : 
On The Use of Notice boards to release the report of sittings to the entire students body 
of the faculty of Law:  
“It is important that everybody has unfettered and unrestricted access to report of LSS 
House of Representatives’ Sittings, and they are properly carried along with the activities 
of the LSS House of Representatives. It is not within the powers of the clerk to decide 
who has access to the report and who does not. That will amount to ultra vires  and 
nullity. What is upon him is to ensure unrestricted equal access to the report of LSS 
House of Representatives’ Sittings which will ensure accountability of the members of 
the legislature. This can effectively do through the notice board.”  PER ABDULLAHI 
CJLSS at Pg. 9 
4. LSS CONSTITUTIONAL LAW – ON WHETHER THE REPORTS OF THE LSS 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES MUST BE MADE AVAI LABLE TO ALL 
MEMBERS OF THE LSS 
“It is important that everybody has unfettered and unrestricted access to report of LSS 
House of Representatives’ Sittings, and they are properly carried along with the activities 
of the LSS House of Representatives. It  is not within the powers of the clerk to decide 
who has access to the report and who does not. That will amount to ultra vires and 
nullity. What is upon him is to ensure unrestricted equal access to the report of LSS 
House of Re presentatives’ Sittings which will ensure accountability of the members of 
the legislature.” PER ABDULLAHI CJLSS at Pg. 9 
5. WORDS AND PHRASES- SHALL 
“it is trite in law and as clear as clement weather or a cloudless sky that the word “shall” 
when used in a statute usually connotes mandatoriness and compulsion. This has been 
emphasized severally by the court and several other courts of competent jurisdictions 
outside this jurisdiction. See the case of JIDE ALADEJOBI V NBA (SUIT NO: 
SC.121/2011), FUTA & ANOR V ASUU (SUIT NO: CA/AK/93/2011) and NONYE 
IMUNZE V FRN (SUIT NO: SC.354/2011).” PER ABDULLAHI CJLSS at Pg. 7 
 
LEAD JUDGEMENT OF HON JUDGE ABDULQUADIR ABDULLAHI 
CJLSS 

3 |  P a g e
 
This is a matter brought before this Honourable Court by originating summons filed and 
dated 10th December 2018  pursuant to order 2 rule 2 of the LSS (Civil Procedure Court Rules)  
2019. The facts that led to this suit were  thus; the claimant is a bona  fide student and a financial 
member of the faculty of law, University of Ilorin, while the defendant is the Clerk of the Law 
Students Society (LSS) House of Representatives. Since the commencement of the 2018/19 
academic session, the LSS House of Represent atives has had several sittings, ratified the 
academic committee of the LSS, as well as ratified the LSS Judiciary.  
However, none of the resolutions reached during any of the sittings of the LSS House of 
Representatives was pasted on any notice board in the faculty. As a financial member of the LSS, 
the claimant commenced this action by originating summons seeking an interpretation of the use 
of the word “Shall” in section 15 (3) of the LSS Con stitution before this Honourable Court. The 
claimant couched two issues for the just determination by this Honourable Court and prayed for 
the following reliefs from this Honourable Court: 
1. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the provision of section 
15 (3) of the LSS Constitution is mandatory and not permissive 
2. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the defendant has not 
performed the constitutional duty that he swore to uphold at all times. 
3. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the defendant has 
flagrantly violated the provisions of the LSS Constitution 
4. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT mandating the defendant to perform 
his duty as contained in the LSS Constitution within a specific time. 
5. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT  mandating the defendants to comply 
with the provisions of the law within a specified time. 
6. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT mandating the defendants to pay a 
sum of two thousand naira to the claimant as to the cost of this litigation. 
7. AND FOR SUCH OTHER ORDERS AND DECLARATIONS THIS COURT MAY 
DEEM FIT IN THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THIS CASE.  
Attached with the claimant’s originating summons is an 11 -paragraph affidavit where the 
claimant averred that the LSS House of Representatives has conducted a lot of sittings, ratified 
the Academic committee of the LSS House and the members of the LS S Judiciary and that no 

4 |  P a g e
 
resolution of the house has been pasted on any notice board in the facility, and a written address 
wherein arguments were canvassed for the two issues as couched by the claimant in the 
originating summons which are; 
1. Whether or not the word „“shall”‟ as used in section 15 (3) of the LSS Constitution is to 
be construed as mandatory and not discretionary? 
2. Whether or not the defendant has breached the provisions of section 15 (3) of the LSS 
Constitution ad as such failed in his duty to uphold the rule of law? 
On issue one which bothers on whether or not the use of the word “shall” as contained in S. 
15 (3) of the LSS Constitution is to be construed as mandatory or permissive, he stratified his 
arguments in his written address in to two standpoints. One, that “shall” once used in a statue 
literally connotes mandatorily and compulsion. Two that the literal rule of interpretation should 
be deployed in interpreting this particular provision of the constitution. On the first standpoint , 
he contended that “shall”, once it is used in a provision of a statute, especially the constitution, it 
literally means the preceding sentence is regarded as a command and gives no room for 
discretion whatsoever he relied on the cases of  ALADETAN VS OGUNYEMI & ORS (2010) 
LPELR 3699 (CA) and INEC & ORS VS INAMA & ORS (2007) LPELR -8063. On that 
standpoint, he submitted that the used of “shall” in S. 15 (3) of LSS Constitution imposes 
mandatorily on the clerk to make a report of sittings of the LSS  House of  Representatives in 
form of release to the entire student body of law faculty, not later than 5 working days. On the 
second standpoint, the claimant contended that the literal rules should be used in interpreting the 
provisions of S. 15 (3) of the LSS Cons titution. He relied on the authorities of N.P.A VS 
LOTUS PLASTICS LTD (2005) 19 NWLR (PT 959), LAWAL TOHEEB ABDURAZAQ 
VS THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION LSS & 2 ORS (SUJ/012/2016).  On the 2 nd 
standpoint, the claimant submitted that the provision of S. 15 (3) of t he LSS constitution should 
be interpreted literally by this Honourable Court. 
On issue 2, the claimants contended in his written address that the defendant has breached 
the sacred provisions of S. 15 (3) of the LSS constitution by failing to perform his constitutional 
duty imposed by that section. They argued on the supremacy of the  constitution and relied on the 
cases of ZAMFARA STATE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY SERVICE COMMISSION & ORS 
VS GOVERNOR OF ZAMFARA STATE & ORS (SUIT NO: CA/S/60/2013) and AG 

5 |  P a g e
 
OGUN VS AG FEDERATION (2002) 18 NWLR (798) 232.  The claimant submitted on issue 
2 that the d efendant has failed to comply with S. 15 (3) of the LSS constitution by not 
performing the duty imposed on him by that provision.  
The defendant responded to the claimant’s originating summons by filing a statement of 
defence dated 20th day of December 201 8 wherein he adopted only the issue two as couched by 
the claimant in the originating summons and made the following prayers before this Honourable 
Court. 
1. A DECLARATION OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the provisions of section 
15 (3) of the LSS Constitution has been fully complied with by the defendant. 
2. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT striking out this suit for lack of merit 
3. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT  mandating the defendants to comply 
with the provisions of the law within a specified time 
4. AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT mandating the claimant to pay a sum 
of three thousand naira to the defendant as to the cost of this litigation 
5. AND FOR SUCH OTHER ORDERS AND DECLARATIONS THIS COURT MAY 
DEEM FIT IN THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THIS CASE.  
Attached with the defendant’s statement of defence is an 8 paragraphs counter affidavit 
wherein the defendant averred that he has complied with the provisions of the constitution as he 
pasted the reports of the sittings of the house on the official WhatsApp group created fo r 
dissemination of information within the faculty. Also attached to the statement of defence of the 
defendant is a written address wherein arguments were canvassed for the sole issue of the 
defendant; 
1. whether or not the defendant has breached the provision s of section 15 (3) of the LSS 
Constitution 
In the written address attached to the statement of defence, the defendant contended that 
spirit of the provisions of section 15 (3) of the LSS Constitution does not impose on the 
defendant the duty to paste the reports of the LSS House of Representatives on the notice board, 
but rather to make it accessible to law students in form of a release which he has been complied 
with by pasting such reports on the UNILAWRITES WhatsApp group, which is also an effective 

6 |  P a g e
 
medium. The defendant argued further that it is  a trite principle of interpretation of statute that 
provisions of the statute must be given their simple and direct meaning and the court should 
confine itself to the plain and unambiguous meanings of the words used in the statute. He relied 
on the case of N.P.A VS LOTUS PLASTICS LTD (2005) 19 NWLR (PT 959). The defendant 
submitted in his written address that he has not in any way breached the duty imposed on him by 
section 15 (3) of the LSS Constitution.   
At this juncture, let me address an issue before I proceed, a careful perusal of the defendant’s 
counter-affidavit will reveal that the defendant averred to the fact that he complied with the 
provisions of the constitution by pasting the reports on the fac ulty WhatsApp group chat. 
Particularly at Paras 6 of the defendants counter -affidavit, he pleaded certain documents which 
he marked as exhibits A-E.  
However, he failed to attach the documents to his processes as filed before this Honourable 
Court, yet he did not tender same before this Honourable Court orally while the case was 
pending. This raises a legal question of what then is the effect of any document pleaded but not 
tendered? Well, for the purposes of legal education, I will embark on a voyage of di scovery in a 
bid to answer the question. The position of the law is clear on the legal effect of any document 
pleaded but not tendered. In the case of OYEDIRAN VS ALLI BIOSU II (1992) 6 NWLR (pt 
24a) 550 at 556,  the supreme court held to the effect that wh en a document is pleaded before a 
court, but such document is not tendered before the court by the party who pleaded the 
document, such document is deemed to have been abandoned by the party pleading it. See also 
OLUFUSOYE v FAKOREDE (1993) NWLR 1 (PT 272) 752.  
Flowing from this, it follows that the failure of the defendants to tender the exhibits pleaded 
on his counter -affidavits is deemed to mean the defendant has abandoned the documents. The 
defendant who has pleaded a document and expects the court to be swayed to give judgment in 
his favour by the documents yet fails to tender the document, the only logical explanation is that 
he has abandoned the document and does not want it to sway the court anymore. The defendants 
cannot expect the court to be look ing for the documents around, which would be very unethical . 
Hence, since no documents were tendered before this Honourable Court, the pleading of same is 
very unnecessary. As such, this Honourable Court deems paragraph 6 of the defendant's counter-
affidavit useless and unnecessary. Consequently, this Honourable Court hereby strikes out 

7 |  P a g e
 
paragraph 6 for lack of basis. Pleading a document that is not tendered is as good as not pleading 
it at all. 
To address the issues, I will be adopting the issues as couched  by the claimant in his 
originating summons because it encompasses the sole issue adopted by the defendant in his 
statement of defence.  
On issue one; it is trite in law and as clear as clement weather or a cloudless sky that the 
word “shall” when used in a statute usually connotes mandatoriness and compulsion. This has 
been emphasized severally by the court and several other courts of comp etent jurisdictions 
outside this jurisdiction. See the case of JIDE ALADEJOBI V NBA (SUIT NO: SC.121/2011), 
FUTA & ANOR V ASUU (SUIT NO: CA/AK/93/2011) and NONYE IMUNZE V FRN 
(SUIT NO: SC.354/2011). Thus, when the wordings of a statute are clear, the court  in 
interpreting such it must give its ordinary meaning, and there is no need for the court to undergo 
any voyage of discovering in finding the meaning of such word. That will amount to an effort in 
futility. This principle is known as the Literal Rule of Interpretation. In the case of ACHINEKU 
VS ISHAGABA (1988) 4 NWLR pt 89411 , the Supreme Court held, that the word “shall”, in 
its ordinary meaning, connotes a command, and that which must be given a compulsory 
meaning. See also BAMAIYI VS A.G FEDERATION (2 001) 90 LRCN 2738 . Hence, it is 
obvious to my mind that the word “shall”, as used in S. 15 (3) of the LSS Constitution is used in 
its ordinary meaning. This is based on the fact that the provision of the constitution is clear and 
unambiguous and must be in terpreted using the literal rule of interpretation. As held in the case 
of GARBA VS FEDERAL CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION (1988) 1 NWLR pt 71499, 
and AINABEHOLO VS ESU WF.M.P.C.S LTD (2007) 2 NWLR pt 1017, when words are 
clear and unambiguous in statues, there is a duty on the court to give them their ordinary 
meaning. Flowing from this, this Honourable Court holds that  s. 15(3) imposes a duty on the 
defendant, the clerk of the LSS House of Representative s to publish a report of the sittings of the 
house. The du ty is mandato ry and not discretionary and  such has to be fulfilled. On issue one, 
this court holds that “shall” as used in S. 15 (3) is construed as mandatory and the literal rule of 
interpretation is used in interpreting the same. See also the cases of OYERINDE V ACCESS 
BANK PLC (SUIT NO: CA/K/110/2012), SOUTH TRUST BANK & ORS V PHERANZY 
GAS LTD & ORS (SUIT NO: CA/L/122/2012) IBEABUCHI & ORS V IKPOKPO & ORS 
(SUIT NO: CA/PH/406/2009).  

8 |  P a g e
 
On issue 2, which bothers on whether the defendants have breached the pr ovisions of S 15 
(3) of the LSS constitution and has failed to perform his constitutional duty, it is necessary to 
examine the provisions of S. 15 (3) of the LSS Constitution very carefully. It provides thus;  
“he shall make a report of such sitting in for m of a release to the entire student body of 
the law faculty, not later than five working days after the sittings.”  
It is clear from the wordings of the constitution above that the clerk of the LSS House of 
Representatives is mandated to make and publish a report of the sittings of the LSS House of 
Representative in not later than 5 working days after the sitting. However, what appears to be 
contentious here is how he is required to perform the duty as there is no express mention of any 
manner in which he is required to perform this duty. An ordinary look at the wordings of the 
provisions of S.15(3) of the LSS Constitution may tempt one to interpret that since there is no 
specific mention of any manner of disseminating the report, any method such as WhatsAp p may 
be accepted as being a valid method of disseminating the report to members of the faculty. While 
this interpretation may be in line with the wordings of the constitution, the question that begs for 
an answer is; will this interpretation be in line wi th the spirit of the constitution? The answ er is 
No! A very big No at that ! Interpreting the provision of S.15 (3) of the LSS constitution to mean 
that any method can be used to disseminate the report by the clerk of the LSS House of 
Representatives will be against the spirit of the law. As held in the cases of BRONIK MOTORS 
v WEMA BANK (1983) SCNLR 296 and AG ONDO v AG EKITI (2001) 91 LRCN 3065,  
the court should take cognizance of the objects and purpose of the law sought to be interpreted 
while interpreti ng. This decision was also emphasized in OGUN STATE v FEDERATION 
(1982) 1-2SC 13 and BENDEL v THE FEDERATION (1981) 10 S.C.1.  
What then comes to the mind of a legal thinking person is that, what is the purpose and 
objects of the provisions of S.15 (3) of the LSS constitution? Well, the answer to that 
jurisprudential question is not far -fetched. The spirit of the provision of S.15 (3) of the LSS 
constitution is to ensure that members of the Faculty of Law are carried along with the activities 
of the LSS Hou se of Representative s. After realizing this, will it now be correct to say that this 
purpose will be achieved by using the official WhatsApp group created for the faulty? The 
answer again is No. This is because the WhatsApp group does not guarantee carryin g-along all 

9 |  P a g e
 
members of the Faculty of Law with the Activities of the LSS House of Representative for so 
many various, yet obvious reasons.  
First, it is not certain or compulsory that every member of the Faculty of Law has access 
to WhatsApp, what will be the fate of members who do not have access to WhatsApp due to one 
cogent reason or another. Second, not all members of the Faculty of Law are on the WhatsApp 
group created for the faculty. This is because a WhatsApp group chat, as judicially noticed can 
only accommodate less than 300 group participants, and there are about 800 students who are 
members of the faculty. Due to the fact that there is only one official WhatsApp group for the 
faculty, how then do the remaining over 500 students get access to the report of the sittings of the 
LSS House of Representatives? Third, messages on a WhatsApp group can only be accessed by 
members of the group; non -group participants cannot have access to information in the group 
except when they are made participants. Also , the rate at which messages are disseminated on 
Whatsapp will discourage some students from viewing message from Whatsapp group as some 
students will just scroll through without bothering to read the content, this will defeat the purpose 
of this particular section. 
However, none of these limitations applies to the notice board. The notice board is 
available in the faculty and can be accessed by anybody who is present in the faculty at any day 
and time. It does not have any limit to the number of people tha t can assess the information 
contained in it. As many as over 800 students of the Law Faculty can be well carried along by 
pasting the reports on the notice board. They can all visit it at their individual convenient time to 
read the information contained on the notice board and be informed.  
It is important that everybody has unfettered and unrestricted access to report of LSS 
House of Representatives’ Sittings, and they are properly carried along with  the activities of the 
LSS House of Representatives. It  is not within the powers of the clerk to decide who has access 
to the report and who does not. That will amount to ultra vires and nullity. What is upon him is to 
ensure unrestricted equal access to the report of LSS House of Re presentatives’ Sittings which 
will ensure accountability of the members of the legislature. This can effectively do through the 
notice board. Thus, on issue two, this honourable court holds that the defendant has breached the 
provisions of S.15 (3) of the LSS Constitution. The provi sions of the constitution are sacred and 
sacrosanct, and it is to be always respected and fulfilled. Hence, it is the duty of the court to 
ensure that these provisions are enforced. See the case of FRN V DARIYE (2011) 13 NWLR 

10 |  P a g e
 
(PT 1265), and EBBI V SPEAKER BAYELSA STATE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY (2012) 5 
NWLR PT 1292, 1 CA.   
Also, let me categorically mention that the intent of the provisions of S.15 (4) of the LSS 
Constitution is not to specify the method of releasing the report of the House Sittings mentioned 
in S.15 (3) of the LSS Constitution as contended by the claimants. This is indeed a very weak, 
flawed and superfluous argument. S.15 (4) of the LSS constitution merely confers the right of 
unhindered access to the society’s notice board and nothing more. It d oes not further explain the 
provision of S.15 (3) of the LSS Constitution as while the former confers an obligation, the later 
confers a right. 
Consequently, I grant prayers 1, 2 and 4 within 7 working days of the claimant as 
contained in his originating summons All other prayers are hereby rejected and refused. 
 
OPINION OF HON JUDGE SHUAIB OLAWALE TESLIM JLSS 
I had a preview of the lead judgment just delivered by my learned brother, 
ABDULQUADIR ABDULLAHI CJLSS , I am in agreement entirely with the reasoning and 
conclusion reached by him. I adopt all his reasoning and opinions as mine including the orders 
and declarations. 
 OPINION OF HON JUDGE LAUFE BOLAJI NASIR JLSS 
Before now, I was privileged to read in d raft the opinion of the learned Chief Judge just 
delivered. I don't have any disparity with the view because it represented the true position of law. 
Therefore, I concur. 
 
APPEARANCES: 
W. O. Taofeeq with F. A. Ibrahim…………………..….…….. Claimant’s counsels 
U. O. Erinle, with M. K. Yahya, R. A. Jamiu ………......……. Defendant’s counsels 