IN THE STUDENTS’ UNION COURT UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN
SUIT NO: SUC/UIL/JC/OJ/005/24-25 SUIT NO: SUC/UIL/JC/OJ/007/24-25 CITATION NO: (2025) 8 USLR
BEFORE THEIR LORDSHIPS:
HON. JUSTICE ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE (CJSU) (PRESIDING JUSTICE) HON. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD KAMALDEEN GBEMISOLA (JSU)
HON. JUSTICE ASHIMI SAOBAN ADEDAYO (JSU)
BETWEEN
NURUDEEN MUJAHID TEKBIRI
KOLEOSO ABDURAHMAN TAIWO
FATOYE OBAFEMI DAVID
OYEWO AJIBOLA ABDULRAZAQ.......................................CLAIMANTS
AND
PRESIDENT OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION ATTORNEY GENERAL OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION........................................................DEFENDANTS
INTERPRETATION OF STATUTE: Literal Rule of Application; INTERPRETATION OF STATUTE: When to Adopt Literal Rule of Interpretation; LEGISLATION: Mandatory Provisions of Statute;
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE: Consolidation of Suits- When to consolidate Suits WORDS AND PHRASES: Summon - The meaning of Summon;
WORDS AND PHRASES: SHALL- The meaning of shall;
WORDS AND PHRASES: Options of Discretion
WORDS AND PHRASES: SHALL – When SHALL implies mandatoriness;
INTERPRETATION OF STATUTE: Literal Rule of Application;
As argued by the Claimants, the literal rule of interpretation shall be applied in the
interpretation of statutes, where the provision of the law is clear, plain and unambiguous. The applicability of the literal rule of interpretation in such circumstance was given a
65
legal credence in Amasike v. Registrar-Gen., C.A.C.(2006) 3 NWLR (Pt. 968) 463 where courts are enjoined to apply the literal interpretation of words where such words are used in a statute without any ambiguity. Therefore, in interpreting a law or laws the court should do so as they ought to be.
In the same vein, the case of Aromolaran v. Agoro (2014) 18 NWLR (Pt. 1438) 153 is apt on the import of the literal rule of interpretation of statutes as the Apex Court ruled that ordinary words must be given their natural and ordinary meaning. It is only when there is doubt or ambiguity that recourse may be had to other cannons of interpretation.
INTERPRETATION OF STATUTE: When to Adopt Literal Rule;
In the case of Sheriff v. PDP (2017) 14 NWLR (Pt. 1585) 212 the Court of Appeal held that the literal rule of interpretation is a principle of interpretation which requires that words used in a statute should be construed in their usual grammatical sense or normal and ordinary meaning. The principle should be applied only when the wording of the statute is clear and unambiguous or where it will not lead to manifest absurdity or result in consequences not anticipated by the legislature. See also Awuse v. Odili (2003) 18 NWLR (Pt. 851) 116; Amaechi v. INEC (2008) 5 NWLR (Pt.1080) 227; A.-G., Ogun State v. Aberuagba (1985) 1 NWLR (Pt. 3) 395; Cotecna Int’l Ltd. v. Churchgate (Nig.) Ltd. (2010) 18 NWLR (Pt. 1225) 346; Adewunmi v. A.-G., Ekiti State (2002)2 NWLR (Pt. 751) 474.
LEGISLATION: Mandatory Provisions of Statute;
I must say that The issue as to whether the defendant has a constitutional mandatory duty vested on him by the provision of SECTION 6(1)(d) of the Constitution of The Student Union, University of Ilorin .(herein referred to as SU constitution) Is settled .The wordings of the law in section 6(1d) of the Constitution is clear as to the mandatoriness of the above. Infact, I need to add that the phrase shall has been held to be a word connoting compulsion in superfluity of cases .My lords, the case of Maitunbi V Baraya (2017)NWLR held thus : ‘Shall’ may be used as implying futurity, a mandate, or direction or giving permission. The word ‘shall’ when used in a statutory provision imports that a thing must be done and when the negative phrase “shall not” is used, it implies that something must not be done. It is a form of a command or mandate. See also Ugwu v. Ararume (2007) 12 NWLR (Pt. 1048) 367;Emordi v. Igbeke (2011) 9 NWLR (Pt. 1251) 24; TabikInv. Ltd. V. GTB Plc (2011) 17 NWLR (Pt. 1276)240; Amoshima v. State (2011) 6 SCNJ 245; Agbitiv. Nigerian Navy (2011) 4 NWLR (Pt. 1236) 175;referred to.] (Pp. 385- 386, paras. F. PER JSU MUHAMMAD KAMALDEEN GBEMISOLA
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE: Consolidation of Suits- When to consolidate suits
Upon a careful perusal of the two suits, the court realized the need for consolidation of the cases, hence a sole issue was raised suo motu by this honourable court and the Counsel to the parties in the two suits were given the opportunity to argue on it. The issue bordered
66

on;
whether the two cases before the court can be consolidated owing to the fact that they border on the same subject matter.
After hearing arguments of counsels on both sides, the court gave a ruling on the issue raised suo motu ruling that the case of Nurudeen Mujahid Tekbiri C 2 Ors v. President of the Students' Union C Anor with Suit No: SUC/UIL/JC/OJ/005/24-25 and the case of Oyewo Ajibola Abdulrazaq v President of the Students' Union with suit no: SUC/UIL/JC/OJ/007/24- 25 are hereby consolidated since they both border on the same subject matter, with Oyewo Ajibola Abdulrazaq as the 4th Claimant in the consolidated suit. PER CJSU ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE
WORDS AND PHRASES: SUMMON - The meaning of SUMMON;
Less consideration can never be given to the provision of law which mandates the President to summon an ordinary congress either on the resolution passed by a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the SC members present at such sitting or whenever the President, in his official capacity, deems it necessary.
In Sheriff v. PDP (2017) 14 NWLR (Pt. 1585) 212, the word “summon” includes to arrange for people to come together for a formal meeting, that is, to convene a meeting as in this instant suit, an ordinary congress.
WORDS AND PHRASES: SHALL - The meaning of SHALL;
It was held in Ibaku v. Ehini (2010) 17 NWLR (Pt. 1222) 286 held that the word "shall" as used in statutes, contracts or the like is generally imperative or mandatory. In common or ordinary parlance, the term "shall" is a word of command and one which has always or which must be given a compulsory meaning, as denoting obligation. It means "must" and is inconsistent with the concept of discretion.
Furthermore, in Adenekan v. The State of Lagos (2021) 1 NWLR (Pt. 1756) 130, the court held that by the ordinary principle or canon of statutory interpretation, the word “shall” is used or employed by the legislature in a statute to show what is usually compulsory and mandatory in application. The defendant's counsel's argument regarding the function of the clause "whenever he considers necessary" has been strongly defeated by the statute's use of "shall" to convey mandatoriness. Ordinarily, "whenever" indicates any time or occasion deemed suitable. However, the term must not be misconstrued to grant the 1st defendant discretion to conduct an ordinary congress whenever he feels like because the defendant's discretion of summoning a meeting must occur at least once during a semester. PER CJSU ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE
WORDS AND PHRASES: Options of Discretion
Flowing from all the aforementioned judicial authorities, it is clear beyond forensic analysis that the 1st Defendant is mandated, with no option of discretion to summon at least one congress in a semester. The 1st Defendant having conducted a Congress in a
67

press conference can be said to have fulfilled the constitutional obligation though not in the way the law envisaged since the law is not only concerned as to the organization of an ordinary congress meeting rather, for the first defendant to summon for an ordinary congress which implies that students must be informed and arranged to come together for a congress meeting and not a congress in the garment of a press conference and as such, the four claimants cannot be said to have sued the first and second defendants wrongly.
Therefore, this honourable court grants the 2nd and 3rd prayers of the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Claimants as well. PER CJSU ISMAIL KHADIJAT MOROMOKE
WORDS AND PHRASES: SHALL- When SHALL implies mandatoriness
On the first issue, my introductory argument has indeed affirmed the position that the provision of Section 6(1)(d)using the word “shall” ex facie implies a mandatory act to be done by the President. Infact ,the defendants seems to be in consonance with this as they led no argument on that argument as couched by the claimants .In law ,Facts admitted need not be proved as held in case of ANTONIO OIL COMPANY LTD V ASSET MANAGEMENT CORPORATION OF NIGERIA (AMCON) and Cole v. Jibunoh (2016) 4 NWLR (Pt. 1503) 499. PER JSU MUHAMMAD KAMALDEEN GBEMISOLA.
LEAD JUDGMENT DELIVERED BY HON. JUSTICE ISMAIL KHADIJAT
MOROMOKE, CJSU
On Thursday, 3rd April, 2025, the case of NURUDEEN MUJAHID TEKBIRI C 3 ORS v PRESIDENT OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION C ANOR and the case of OYEWO AJIBOLA ABDULRASAQ v PRESIDENT OF THE STUDENTS’ UNION, bordering on the same subject matter were brought before the Students’ Union Court for determination. Upon a careful perusal of the two suits, the court realized the need for consolidation of the cases, hence a sole issue was raised suo motu by this honourable court and the Counsel to the parties in the two suits were given the opportunity to argue on it. The issue bordered on;
whether the two cases before the court can be consolidated owing to the fact that they border on the same subject matter.
After hearing arguments of counsels on both sides, the court gave a ruling on the issue raised suo motu ruling that the case of Nurudeen Mujahid Tekbiri C 2 Ors v. President of the Students' Union C Anor with Suit No: SUC/UIL/JC/OJ/005/24-25 and the case of Oyewo Ajibola Abdulrazaq v President of the Students' Union with suit no: SUC/UIL/JC/OJ/007/24- 25 are hereby consolidated since they both border on the same subject matter, with Oyewo Ajibola Abdulrazaq as the 4th Claimant in the consolidated suit.
The action of the four Claimants, upon consolidation was an originating summons brought pursuant to Order 2 Paragraph B Rule 12 of the Students’ Union Court Rules 2024
and in support of which are three 11-paragraph affidavits deposed to by the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Claimants, where two issues were couched for the just determination by this
  68

honourable court:
1. WHETHER OR NOT THE PROVISION SEC c (D) OF THE STUDENT UNION CONSTITUTION IS BINDING ON THE DEFENDANT?
2. WHETHER THE DEFENDANT HAS BREACH THE PROVISION OF SEC c OF THE STUDENT UNION CONSTITUTION?
The 4th Claimant also supported his originating process with a12-paragraph affidavit deposed to him in addition to a written address where two issues were couched for determination:
Whether the defendant has a constitutional mandatory duty vested on him by the provision of SECTION c(1)(d) of the Constitution of The Students’ Union, University of Ilorin .(herein referred to as SU constitution)?
Whether or not the President of the Students’ Union has breached the provision of Section c(1)(d) of the Constitution of The Students’ Union, University of Ilorin which provides that there shall be at least one congress (Ordinary Congress) in a semester?
Whether or not the President of the Students’ Union has breached the provision of Section c(1)(d) of the Constitution of The Students’ Union, University of Ilorin which provides that there shall be at least one congress (Ordinary Congress) in a semester?
The fact leading to this suit is simply that the 1st Defendant was alleged by the four claimants in this consolidated suit that he failed to summon a Congress in the Harmattan Semester of the 2024/2025 Session. The Claimants brought this suit contending that the President of the
Student Union has gruesomely breached the provisions of Section 6(1)d of the Students’ Union Compendium. The claimants adumbrated on the issues they couched in their written addresses before this honourable court.
The two defendants in the consolidated suit did not file a preliminary objections but brought their defense before this honourable supported by a 11-paragraph affidavit deposed to by the first defendant with the minutes of a pleaded document titled “MINUTE
OF STUDENTS UNION CONGRESS 37TH STUDENTS UNION ADMINISTRATION, THE SMART-PURPOSED ADMINISTRATION, UNIVERSITY OF ILORIN, ILORIN
NIGERIA” dated 31st day of January, 2025
held at the University Auditorium and attached to the defense is a written address where two issues which is also contained in the defendants’ defense, are couched therein. They are:
1. WHETHER OR NOT THE PRESIDENT IS LIABLE IN BREACH OF SECTION c(2) OF THE STUDENT’S UNION CONSTITUTION?
2. WHETHER OR NOT THE INTENTION OF THE LAW HAS BEEN FULFILLED, HAVING CONDUCTED A PRESS CONFERENCE?
The counsel to the two defendants adumbrated on the two issues couched in their written 69

address while applying orally to the court for the court to grant the leave for the amendment of their defense to reflect the issue in their written address. Although the court ruled against the application, the counsel to the defendants went ahead to file the motion on notice for the amendment of their defense to reflect the issue in their written address. This honourable court refused to hear the application as it was filed against the order of the court and a careful perusal of the defense as well as the written address filed in the two suits before the were consolidated actually reflected the same issues couched with the same wordings. It is only the body of the argument on the issues particularly issue two that the phrase “press conference” was changed to “congress” and hence, the motion on notice for the amendment of the defendants’ defense to reflect the issues in their written address attached
to it, holds no water in law. The 4th Claimant also replied on point of law that the 1st defendant is not under the discretion according to the law since the word “shall” was used in the provision of the law. He also argued that the law specified that Congress and not press conference should be summoned by the President placing reliance on a number of judicial authorities. Student Union has gruesomely breached the provisions of Section 6(1)d of the Students’ Union Compendium. The claimants adumbrated on the issues they couched in their written addresses before this honourable court refused to hear the application as it was filed against the order of the court and a careful perusal of the defense as well as the written address filed in the two suits before the were consolidated actually reflected the same issues couched with
the same wordings. It is only the body of the argument on the issues particularly issue two that the phrase “press conference” was changed to “congress” and hence, the motion on notice for the amendment of the defendants’ defense to reflect the issues in the written
address attached to it, holds no water in law. The 4th Claimant also replied on point of law
that the 1st defendant is not under the discretion according to the law since the word “shall” was used in the provision of the law. He also argued that the law specified that Congress and not press conference should be summoned by the President placing reliance on a number of judicial authorities.
Having examined all process filed by the Claimants and that of the Defendants, A SOLE ISSUE HAS BEEN DISTILLED BY THIS HONOURABLE COURT THE FOR PROPER AND JUST DETERMINATION OF THIS MATTER which is;
WHETHER OR NOT the intention of the law in Section c(1) of the Students’ Union Constitution has been fulfilled by the President having conducted a Congress in a Press Conference?
RESOLUTION OF THE COURT ON THE SOLE ISSUE
WHETHER OR NOT the intention of the law in Section c(1) of the Students’ Union Constitution has been fulfilled by the President having conducted a Congress in a Press Conference?
Having perused the arguments of both opposing sides to this matter, it is pertinent to state that the relevant and extant provision of the law relevant to determine this suit is Section 6(1)
 70

of the Students’ Union Constitution which states to the effect that:
a. The general assembly of all students shall hereinafter be referred to as "congress".
b. At least four percent (4%) of total membership of the Union shall constitute a quorum at the ordinary congress.
The President shall summon an ordinary congress on the resolution by two-third (2/3) majority of the SC members present at such sitting and shall process such within three (3) working days of such resolution.
c. The President shall summon an ordinary congress whenever he considers such necessary. d. There shall be at least one (1) congress in a semester.
As argued by the Claimants, the literal rule of interpretation shall be applied in the interpretation of statutes, where the provision of the law is clear, plain and unambiguous.
The applicability of the literal rule of interpretation in such circumstance was given a legal credence in Amasike v. Registrar-Gen., C.A.C.(2006) 3 NWLR (Pt. 968) 463 where courts are enjoined to apply the literal interpretation of words where such words are used in a statute without any ambiguity. Therefore, in interpreting a law or laws the court should do so as they ought to be.
In the same vein, the case of Aromolaran v. Agoro (2014) 18 NWLR (Pt. 1438) 153 is apt on the import of the literal rule of interpretation of statutes as the Apex Court ruled that ordinary words must be given their natural and ordinary meaning. It is only when there is doubt or ambiguity that recourse may be had to other cannons of interpretation.
In the case of Sheriff v. PDP (2017) 14 NWLR (Pt. 1585) 212 the Court of Appeal held that the literal rule of interpretation is a principle of interpretation which requires that words used in a statute should be construed in their usual grammatical sense or normal and ordinary meaning. The principle should be applied only when the wording of the statute is clear and unambiguous or where it will not lead to manifest absurdity or result in consequences not anticipated by the legislature. See also Awuse v. Odili (2003) 18 NWLR (Pt. 851) 116; Amaechi v. INEC (2008) 5 NWLR (Pt.1080) 227; A.-G., Ogun State v. Aberuagba (1985) 1 NWLR (Pt. 3) 395; Cotecna Int’l Ltd. v.Churchgate (Nig.) Ltd. (2010) 18 NWLR (Pt. 1225) 346; Adewunmi v. A.-G., Ekiti State (2002)2 NWLR (Pt. 751) 474.
Less consideration can never be given to the provision of law which mandates the President to summon an ordinary congress either on the resolution passed by a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the SC members present at such sitting or whenever the President, in his official capacity, deems it necessary.
In Sheriff v. PDP (2017) 14 NWLR (Pt. 1585) 212, the word “summon” includes to arrange for people to come together for a formal meeting, that is, to convene a meeting as in this instant suit, an ordinary congress.
It was held in Ibaku v. Ehini (2010) 17 NWLR (Pt. 1222) 286 held that the word "shall" as used in statutes, contracts or the like is generally imperative or mandatory. In common or ordinary parlance, the term "shall" is a word of command and one which has always or
71

which must be given a compulsory meaning, as denoting obligation. It means "must" and is inconsistent with the concept of discretion.
Furthermore, in Adenekan v. The State of Lagos (2021) 1 NWLR (Pt. 1756) 130, the court held that by the ordinary principle or canon of statutory interpretation, the word “shall” is used or employed by the legislature in a statute to show what is usually compulsory and mandatory in application.
The defendant's counsel's argument regarding the function of the clause "whenever he considers necessary" has been strongly defeated by the statute's use of "shall" to convey mandatoriness. Ordinarily, "whenever" indicates any time or occasion deemed suitable. However, the term must not be misconstrued to grant the 1st defendant discretion to conduct an ordinary congress whenever he feels like because the defendant's discretion of summoning a meeting must occur at least once during a semester.
Frankly, the tone of direction, compulsion, and obligation envisaged in Section 6(1)(a-e) immortalizes the essentialism and power of the Congress as explicitly provided under Section 3 of the Students’ Union Constitution. To boot, Section 6(1)(d) emphasizes that at least one congress must be summoned in a semester. This broadly shows that the Congress can be summoned numerous times even more than one in a semester but must not less than one.
Also, It is transparent beyond the slightest ambiguity that the wordings of the law as regards the general assembly of all students is termed “Congress”. Assuming without conceding that a press conference was conducted, the question to ask is will that constitute the intention of the law as regards summoning a congress?
The Claimants in this suit averred in their respective affidavit evidence particularly paragraphs 9 and 10 that no notice of congress was broadcasted by the President of the student union for first semester in the 2024/2025 academic session, hence no congress was summoned according to them. On the other hand, the 1st Defendant, in his 11-paragraph affidavit averred in paragraphs 7 and 8 that he conducted and presided over a congress on the 30th day of January 2025, with the minute attached therewith. It was made known through the minute that the congress started immediately the opening activities of the Students’ Union Press Conference were concluded, with the President’s statement that “This audience shall now be addressed as The Congress”.
Flowing from all the aforementioned judicial authorities, it is clear beyond forensic analysis that the 1st Defendant is mandated, with no option of discretion to summon at least one congress in a semester. The 1st Defendant having conducted a Congress in a press conference can be said to have fulfilled the constitutional obligation though not in the way the law envisaged since the law is not only concerned as to the organization of an ordinary congress meeting rather, for the first defendant to summon for an ordinary congress which implies that students must be informed and arranged to come together for a congress meeting and not a congress in the garment of a press conference and as such, the four claimants cannot be said to have sued the first and second defendants wrongly.
Therefore, this honourable court grants the 2nd and 3rd prayers of the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Claimants as well as the 1st and 3rd prayers of the 4th Claimants are granted as sought.
72

The prayers are as follows:
A DECLARATION OF THIS HONORABLE COURT that the President of the Students’ Union is constitutionally mandated to call for Congress under Section 6 of the Students’ Union Constitution
AN ORDER OF THIS HONORABLE COURT that the President of the Students’ Union complies with the provision of Section 6 of the Students’ Union as clearly defined under the law
AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the Student Union should conduct at least one congress in a semester henceforth.
AN ORDER OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT that the 1st defendant should further comply with the said provision of the constitution.
This honourable court make no order as to costs as each party shall bear his costs.
HON. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD KAMALDEEN GBEMISOLA, JSU
(CONCURRENT JUDGEMENT)
After a careful perusal of the lead judgement of my learned brother, Hon justice ISMAIL KHADIJAH MOROMOKE , I must say I reckon with the analogical reasoning and the judicial dexterity depicted in the wordings and lines of my lords dwell crafted judgement .I was so close to not writing a judgement as it fully captures my lines of reasoning but the need to give an addendum has not availed me. Hence, permit me to add my two cent as follows;
I also think the issue to be determined by this court is a solo issue, the just determination of which leads to the just and proper determination of all other issues .
WHETHER OR NOT the intention of the law in Section c(1) of the Students’ Union Compendium has been fulfilled by the President having conducted a Congress in a Press Conference?
I must say that The issue as to whether the defendant has a constitutional mandatory duty vested on him by the provision of SECTION 6(1)(d) of the Constitution of The Student Union, University of Ilorin .(herein referred to as SU constitution) Is settled .The wordings of the law in section 6(1d) of the Constitution is clear as to the mandatoriness of the above. Infact, I need to add that the phrase shall has been held to be a word connoting compulsion in superfluity of cases .My lords, the case of Maitunbi V Baraya (2017)NWLR held thus :
‘Shall’ may be used as implying futurity, a mandate, or direction or giving permission. The word ‘shall’ when used in a statutory provision imports that a thing must be done and when the negative phrase “shall not” is used, it implies that something must not be done. It is a form of a command or mandate. See also [Ugwu v. Ararume (2007) 12 NWLR (Pt. 1048) 367;Emordi v. Igbeke (2011) 9 NWLR (Pt. 1251) 24; TabikInv. Ltd. V. GTB Plc (2011) 17 NWLR(Pt. 1276)240; Amoshima v. State (2011) 6 SCNJ 245; Agbitiv. Nigerian Navy (2011) 4 NWLR (Pt. 1236) 175;referred to.] (Pp. 385-386, paras. F.
The aforementioned section envisages the need for the president to call a Congress and
  73

even establishes it’s importance by providing in Section 5 of the Students’ union constitution that the congress as one of the four organs of the Union .The above at first establishes, and the by the preceding section provide it's importance and need to have it .
It is best to put the above in the correct order for proper and chronological flow of judgement.
On the first issue, my introductory argument has indeed affirmed the position that the provision of Section 6(1)(d)using the word “shall” ex facie implies a mandatory act to be done by the President. Infact ,the defendants seems to be in consonance with this as they led no argument on that argument as couched by the claimants .In law ,Facts admitted need not be proved as held in case of ANTONIO OIL COMPANY LTD V ASSET MANAGEMENT CORPORATION OF NIGERIA (AMCON) and Cole v. Jibunoh (2016) 4 NWLR (Pt. 1503) 499.
Permit me to produce the provision of Section 6 which provides for the Congress :
I must say that The issue as to whether the defendant has a constitutional mandatory duty vested on him by the provision of SECTION 6(1)(d) of the Constitution of The Student Union, University of Ilorin .(herein referred to as SU constitution) Is settled .The wordings of the law in section 6(1d) of the Constitution is clear as to the mandatoriness of the above. Infact, I need to add that the phrase shall has been held to be a word connoting compulsion in superfluity of cases .My lords, the case of Maitunbi V Baraya (2017)NWLR held thus :
‘Shall’ may be used as implying futurity, a mandate, or direction or giving permission. The word ‘shall’ when used in a statutory provision imports that a thing must be done and when the negative phrase “shall not” is used, it implies that something must not be done. It is a form of a command or mandate. See also [Ugwu v. Ararume (2007) 12 NWLR (Pt. 1048) 367;Emordi v. Igbeke (2011) 9 NWLR (Pt. 1251) 24; TabikInv. Ltd. V. GTB Plc (2011) 17 NWLR(Pt. 1276)240; Amoshima v. State (2011) 6 SCNJ 245; Agbitiv. Nigerian Navy (2011) 4 NWLR (Pt. 1236) 175;referred to.] (Pp. 385-386, paras. F.
The aforementioned section envisages the need for the president to call a Congress and even establishes it’s importance by providing in Section 5 of the Students’ union constitution
that the congress as one of the four organs of the Union .The above at first establishes, and the by the preceding section provide it's importance and need to have it .
It is best to put the above in the correct order for proper and chronological flow of judgement.
On the first issue, my introductory argument has indeed affirmed the position that the provision of Section 6(1)(d)using the word “shall” ex facie implies a mandatory act to be done by the President. Infact ,the defendants seems to be in consonance with this as they led no argument on that argument as couched by the claimants .In law ,Facts admitted need not be proved as held in case of ANTONIO OIL COMPANY LTD V ASSET MANAGEMENT CORPORATION OF NIGERIA (AMCON) and Cole v. Jibunoh (2016) 4 NWLR (Pt. 1503) 499.
Permit me to produce the provision of Section 6 which provides for the Congress : 74

6(a) The general assembly of all students shall hereinafter be referred to as “congress”.
6(b) At least four percent (4%) of total membership of the Union shall constitute a quorum at the ordinary congress. The President shall summon an ordinary congress on the resolution by two-third (2/3) majority of the SC members present at such sitting and shall process such within three (3) working days of such resolution.
6(c)The President shall summon an ordinary congress whenever he considers such necessary.
6(d) There shall be at least one (1) congress in a semester.
Need I point out that the provision of this section envisages a meeting of students for a Congress not a press conference later named congress by Mr President. The constitution by using the word “summon ” in section 6(c ) establishes that a formal meeting called a Congress must be summoned by the president whenever he considers necessary this is best depicted from the word “summons “ used in the section. The term summon has been defined by the court in the case of Sheriff v. PDP (2017) 14 NWLR (Pt. 1585) 212“To summon a meeting means to arrange a formal official meeting”. (P.376, paras. F-H)
Hence, I hold The 1st Defendant having conducted a Congress in a press conference can be said to have fulfilled the constitutional obligation though not in the way the law envisaged since the law is not only concerned as to the organization of an ordinary congress meeting rather, for the first defendant to summon for an ordinary congress which implies that students must be arranged for students to come together for a congress meeting and not a congress in the garment of a press conference and as such, the four claimants cannot be said to have sued the first and second defendants wrongly. I give no order as to cost and I hereby grant same reliefs as sought by my learned brother , Hon. Justice Ismail Khadijat Moromoke CJSU.
I make no order as to cost .
HON. JUSTICE ASHIMI SAOBAN ADEDAYO, JSU (CONCURRENT
JUDGEMENT)
Having read in draft the opinion of my learned brother, Honourable Justice Ismail Khadijat Moromoke, CJSU on the resolution of this honourable court on the sole issue couched for determination, I agree with his reasoning and conclusion and also make no order as to cost
APPEARANCES:
FOR THE CLAIMANTS: A. T. KOLEOSO
A. AMOLEGBE (Lead Counsel to the 1st Claimant at the first hearing) T. Q. GBADAMOSI (Counsel to the 1st Claimant at the first hearing)
   75

O D. FATOYE A.A. OYEWO M.T. Nurudeen
FOR THE DEFENDANTS:
E. F. ASHAOLU SGSU (Lead Counsel) B. A. OYEGBAMI
O. T. ANIFOWOSE
H. O. ALOWOOJA
S. D. SOLIU
A. O. ABDULGANIU
AMICUS CURIAE
PRINCE P. O. OYEBANJI SAU, SALC
